 17 Seeking a Settlement   Just before he left London, Gandhi heard that the funds in his Phoenix settlement were running dangerously low. The satyagraha of 1908 and 1909 had severely tested the community’s will to give. Much money had been collected, and spent, on sustaining the families of passive resisters. Now the main organ of the struggle was in danger of going under. On 27 November 1909 – shortly after he had completed the first draft of Hind Swaraj – Gandhi wrote to his nephew Maganlal that they must somehow keep their weekly magazine afloat. Whatever happened, they would ‘bring out at least a one-page issue of Indian Opinion and distribute it among the people as long as there is even one person in Phoenix’. The SS Kildonan Castle arrived in Cape Town on 30 November. On disembarking, Gandhi heard that the philanthrophist Ratan Tata had sent a cheque for Rs 25,000 to aid the struggle in South Africa. Indian Opinion had been saved; so too, perhaps, the struggle itself. Ratan Tata was the son of Jamshedji Tata, the pioneering Parsi entrepreneur who had started India’s first steel mill and endowed the Indian Institute of Science. The younger Tata spent a great deal of time on the Continent and in England – he had a home in Twickenham – but maintained an interest in Indian politics. Naturally, he preferred the Moderates to the Extremists. Gokhale in particular was a friend. In 1905, Gokhale had started a ‘Servants of India Society’, whose members were required to ‘work for the advancement of all [Indians], regardless of caste and creed’. The objectives of the society included the promotion of education and communal harmony, and the advancement of women and low castes.2 Tata was an early supporter of the Servants of India Society, which he sent Rs 6,000 a year because he saw it as ‘a constitutional and rational alternative to the violent methods which some people adopt for the progress of our people and our country’.3  Tata followed developments in the Transvaal closely. He was disappointed that Gandhi’s trip to London had ended in failure. He noted the public meetings held in India, but felt that the time had come ‘when our appreciation … must take the form, not merely of expressions of sympathy but also of substantial money help’. In the last week of November, he sent Gokhale a cheque for Rs 25,000 (equivalent, roughly, to £1,650 then, and to £131,000 today), asking him to forward it to Gandhi ‘to be spent in relieving destitution, and in aid of the struggle generally.’ Explaining his gesture, Tata said he had watched with unfeigned admiration the undaunted and determined stand which our countrymen in the Transvaal – a mere handful in numbers – have made and are making against heavy odds and in the face of monstrous injustice and oppression, to assert their rights as citizens of the Empire and as freemen, and to vindicate the honour and dignity of our motherland … The ruinous sacrifices which men mostly of very modest means are cheerfully making in this unequal struggle, the fortitude with which men of education and refinement are ungrudgingly submitting to treatment ordinarily accorded to hardened convicts and criminals, the calm resignation of men devotedly attached to their homes to cruel disruption of family ties, and the perfectly legitimate and constitutional character of the resistance which is being offered and which is in such striking contrast to the occasional acts of violence which we deplore nearer home – all these to my mind, present a spectacle of great nobility of aim, resoluteness of purpose and strength of moral fibre with which we Indians are not usually credited.4 This was a striking passage, which (among other things) strongly suggests that Ratan Tata had been reading Indian Opinion. It displays an acute understanding of the larger issues at stake, relating to the status of British subjects across the Empire, to the prestige and honour of India, and not least, to rival methods of obtaining justice and redress. On receiving the news, Gokhale sent Gandhi a telegram urging him to write directly to Tata thanking him for his ‘munificent [and] timely help’. He also issued a public statement asking other patrons to follow Mr Tata’s lead. The industrialist’s gesture would ‘put fresh heart and hope’ into Gandhi and his colleagues, who were ‘determined to win in this struggle or perish’. Should not the mother country, for whose sake all this suffering is being ‘undergone’, asked Gokhale, now ‘recognise her responsibilities in the matter and come to their assistance? Mr Tata’s example needs to be widely followed and that without delay.’5 It was. Inspired by Ratan Tata, his fellow Parsi grandee J. B. Petit sent £750 from Bombay, and Gandhi’s friend Pranjivan Mehta raised a similar sum in  Rangoon. Other sections of the Indian diaspora also chipped in: £135 came from London, £61 from Mozambique and £59 from Zanzibar. Disembarking at Cape Town on their return from London, Gandhi and Hajee Habib took a train north-east to Johannesburg. At the city’s Park Station they were met by a large crowd, mostly of Indians, with a sprinkling of Chinese and European supporters. The next day, Gandhi spoke at a meeting of Tamil ladies, thanking them for supporting their brothers and husbands who had been to jail. On the 5th, he addressed an audience of 1,500 at the Hamidia Mosque, where he spoke of the larger importance of their struggle and thanked Ratan Tata for his gift (a product, in Gandhi’s view, of ‘the magnificent efforts that were being made [in India] by the self-sacrificing Mr Polak’). The struggle was now to be renewed. Gandhi sent a letter to Indian Opinion announcing this, saying, ‘I hope I shall find myself lodged in gaol before this letter appears.’ His second son, Manilal, who had turned seventeen in October, would also court arrest, in pursuit of his father’s belief that ‘to go to gaol or suffer similar hardships with a pure motive for the motherland is the truest kind of education.’ In the third week of December, Gandhi went to Natal. He arrived at Umgeni station at night and walked three hours in the dark to Phoenix through the grass, nervous that he might ‘tread upon a snake or scorpion’. Kasturba was pleased to see him. ‘Mrs G. has considerably improved,’ he wrote to Kallenbach, ‘she is sweet. She has been working regularly at the Press for one hour. She folds Tolstoy’s letter. What a privilege for her!’ On Sunday, 19 December, Gandhi was due to speak at a meeting in Durban. A crowd of more than 1,000 had gathered at the Victoria Street Indian Market, but the main speaker did not come. That was no fault of his, however. The journalist P. S. Aiyar had gone in a car to pick up Gandhi from his settlement. That mode of transport was very new in South Africa. En route to Phoenix, the car got stuck in a stream (whether it was the vehicle’s or the driver’s fault the sources do not say). No one was injured, but by the time word of the mishap got to Phoenix, it was too late for Gandhi to come to Durban. The next day, Gandhi went to Durban by the safer route, that of the railway. The meeting this time was held in the Albert Street Hall. After being garlanded  ‘amid rousing cheers’, he announced that some young men, among them his son Manilal and the Cambridge-educated barrister Joseph Royeppen, would ‘accompany him to the Transvaal and [were] expected with him to go to gaol.’ Gandhi crossed back into the Transvaal with six companions. He hoped they would be arrested; when they were not, he sent Royeppen and Manilal back to Natal, asking them to travel afresh to Johannesburg and hawk without a licence, to simultaneously break the law and demonstrate that selling fruits and vegetables was as honourable a trade as being a clerk or lawyer. This time the young men were detained, and sentenced to ten days with hard labour.10 In this new phase of the campaign, the Tamils were, as before, in the vanguard. Gandhi wrote to Gokhale that Thambi Naidoo was ‘perhaps the bravest and staunchest’ of the passive resisters. I do not know of any Indian who knows the spirit of the struggle so well as he does. He was born in Mauritius, but is more Indian than most of us. He has sacrificed himself entirely, and has sent me a defiant message, saying that, even though I may yield … he alone will offer resistance and die in the Transvaal gaols. The Tamil women were not far behind. In a spectacular affirmation of solidarity, Mrs Amacanoo and Mrs Packirsamy – whose husbands were in jail – came to Gandhi’s office in Rissik Street, removed their earrings, nose-rings, bangles and necklaces, and said they would not wear them again until the end of the struggle. The most steadfast woman supporter of the satyagraha, however, was Gandhi’s secretary, Sonja Schlesin. In times of peace, she dealt patiently – not to say heroically – with her employer’s indecipherable scrawl, his eccentric work and eating habits, and his many and various clients. In times of strife she was called upon to urge and mobilize the women. On their behalf she drafted and sent many petitions to government. The formal historical record has few traces of Miss Schlesin’s contributions. Henry and Millie Polak spoke of their involvement in books, essays and letters. Kallenbach’s correspondence with Gandhi and others is very extensive. But since Miss Schlesin was with Gandhi all day, most days, there are few letters between them. From stray reports in Indian Opinion, however, we get a sense of how much Sonja Schlesin did for the struggle. Passive resisters in jail were allowed a weekly visit. Sometimes relatives made the trip; when these were unavailable, or in jail themselves, Miss  Schlesin rushed about on her bicycle from prison to prison, carrying food and messages. With the main Indian leaders going in and out of jail, Gandhi’s secretary also handled the ‘Passive Resistance Fund’: monitoring and recording the inflow of donations, and directing the money to individuals and families in need. A rare letter from Sonja Schlesin in the archives gives glimpes both of her competence and her independence of mind. Gandhi was spending several weeks outside Johannesburg; in his absence, Miss Schlesin was keeping the office going. Her letter begins with the question of some scholarships Pranjivan Mehta had endowed for Indian students. Applications had begun coming in, and Miss Schlesin was deciding which young man seemed ‘clever’ and which not. She moves next to dues owed by the office to other lawyers, then to the renewal of Gandhi’s and Polak’s subscriptions to the Law Society. News of the Gujarati merchant and activist A. M. Cachalia follows. The last paragraph turns to her own self-education. Here she tells Gandhi that she has been just reading a book recently issued called ‘The Truth about Women’. I don’t agree with the conclusion of the writer, but she has gathered together much material which is interesting and instructive. Amongst other things, she says that chastity is not a moral evolution, but that the origination of the idea is connected with the question of property.12 In this letter, Miss Schlesin addresses her employer as ‘Bapu’, or Father. She was, in age, between Harilal and Manilal, yet far more willing to stand up to Gandhi than they were. This last line of her letter was surely a tease, which suggested, to her friend, employer and fictive father, that the brahmacharya he so exalted had its basis in the desire to keep large estates from being broken up. Miss Schlesin thus implied that younger brothers became monks to keep the economic status of the family intact, rather than (as Gandhi may have fancifully imagined) for elevated spiritual reasons alone. For all her cheekiness, Sonja Schlesin was devoted to Gandhi and his cause. Hers was a double or perhaps triple transgression: a white, Jewish woman expressing her solidarity with persecuted Indian males. Much later, her employer gratefully recalled what his struggle owed her. This ‘young girl,’ he wrote, ‘soon constituted herself the watchman and warder of the morality not only of my office but of the whole movement’. Thus  Pathans, Patels, ex-indentured men, Indians of all classes and ages surrounded her, sought her advice and followed it. Europeans in South Africa would generally never travel in the same railway compartment as Indians, and in the Transvaal they are even prohibited from doing so. Yet Miss Schlesin would deliberately sit in the third class compartment for Indians like other Satyragrahis and even resist the guards who interfered with her.13 In February 1910, Parsee Rustomjee was released after a year in jail. He told the press of the difficulties he had faced. He was asked to break stones; when he complained, the prison doctor told him that ‘I would be all right when I had thrown off superfluous fat.’ The flying chips affected his eyesight; when he complained about that too, the doctor flippantly remarked that ‘I should, on being discharged, spend from £10 to £20, and be operated upon.’ Rustomjee believed that the passive resisters had been sent to Diepkloof, a notoriously harsh prison, ‘in order to break their spirit and resolution’. After his release he had come back to Natal to restore his business and his health, both in ruins. He remained defiant, telling the Johannesburg press, and by extension the Transvaal Government, that ‘there are some Indians left, including myself, who will not be broken, no matter what hardships they are subjected to, and I shall soon have the privilege of affording the Government an opportunity of sending me to Diepkloof or any other place they choose.’ On 18 February the passive resisters of the Transvaal hosted a banquet for Joseph Doke, who was departing on a tour of the United States. There were three hundred guests, among them sixty Europeans. Kallenbach and Thambi Naidoo supervised the kitchen, while Gandhi helped serve the dishes. The menu was wholly vegetarian: soup, macaroni cheese, fruits, coffee and mineral water. The main speaker was Doke’s fellow Nonconformist minister, Charles Phillips. His Congregational Church had, from very early on, been sympathetic to Gandhi’s cause. When the Asiatic Ordinance was first proposed, Phillips had written that ‘Indians are just as amenable to sanitary regulations’ as Europeans, adding that ‘in morals they are in no way inferior; in matters of temperance they are decidedly superior’.Now the minister recalled the ‘grand old passive resister John Bunyan’, also a Baptist minister, who had spent twelve years in prison for following his conscience. Rev. Phillips said Thambi Naidoo ‘showed something of the spirit of John Bunyan’. There was now a window in Westminster Abbey in honour of Bunyan; the minister hoped ‘that in the future they would be able to  erect a monument in remembrance of Indians and Chinese in the Transvaal, who had suffered so bravely and splendidly’. As ever, Gandhi left open the possibility of a compromise. Two English friends, the lawyer J. C. Gibson and the minister Charles Phillips, had offered to talk to the Government. Gandhi told them that if the existing legislation was repealed, so that all bona fide Indian residents of Transvaal were allowed to enter, live and practise their trade, and the laws so modified ‘as to enable any Asiatic immigrants of culture to enter the Colony on precisely the same terms as Europeans’, then ‘the granting of these two concessions will finally close the struggle, and remove the question from the arena of Indian politics.’ In India, Gopal Krishna Gokhale introduced a bill in the Viceroy’s Legislative Council seeking to stop the export of indentured labour to Natal. The bill was tabled on 25 February 1910, with Gokhale speaking eloquently on the handicaps of Indians in different provinces of South Africa. Indenture was the original sin; had it not been introduced there ‘would have been no Indian problem in that sub- continent today’. The system was akin to slavery; it ferried ‘helpess men and women to a distant land’ to labour under harsh conditions and under employers whose language, customs and traditions were so alien to their own. When freed, the labourers were subject to a savage and punitive tax. The traders who serviced their needs were, in turn, subject to manifold restrictions. Such was the situation in Natal; the whites in the Transvaal, meanwhile, had inflicted on their Indian co-subjects ‘galling and degrading indignities and humiliations’ of a kind unprecedented in the history of the Empire. These cumulative insults meant that ‘no single question of our time has evoked more bitter feelings throughout India – feelings in the presence of which the best friends of British rule have had to remain helpless – than the continued ill- treatment of Indians in South Africa.’ Gokhale’s motion was resoundingly endorsed by other members. The gifted Bombay lawyer M. A. Jinnah said the treatment of Indians in South Africa had ‘roused the feelings of all classes in this country to the highest pitch’. Yet, because of the indifference of the Government of India, ‘we are not a wee bit better than we were at the commencement of 1907 when the struggle reached its very height’. A Mr Mudholkar affirmed that on this question there was ‘a  singular unanimity of opinion among men of all the races, creeds, castes and sections who inhabit this vast continent’. Mazharul Haque, a member from Bihar, compared the £3 tax in Natal to the jeziya, the fee levied on non-believers in Islamic states about which European historians had written so harshly. Its application was both ironic and shameful, since ‘Buddha, Christ and Mohammed were [all] Asiatics.’ Gokhale was followed by more than a dozen speakers, with the debate covering sixty closely printed pages of the legislative record. The motion passed unanimously: with effect from 1 July 1911, no more Indians would be sent to work on the sugar plantations or in the coal mines of Natal. Following the proceedings through the newspapers that came to him by post, Gandhi thought this would lead to an ‘immediate improvement’ in the status of Indians in Natal. In the Transvaal, the struggle for just treatment would continue, but now perhaps with a greater chance of success.20 The hopes were illusory. From March, the Transvaal Government instituted harsh measures to break the resistance. Many prisoners (among them Manilal Gandhi) were put in solitary confinement. Other resisters were sent overland to the Portuguese-controlled port of Delagoa Bay and back by ship to India. They arrived in Bombay and Madras, in near destitution. The stories of the deportees were circulated in the Indian press and passed on to the Colonial Office by L. W. Ritch. From Ritch’s account, it appeared the authorities had picked on the poorest and most vulnerable. Those deported included Gulam Mahomed, a mine worker who had served with the British in the Anglo-Boer War; Kathia, a washerman who had originally come to Natal under indenture; Narajana Apanna, a bottle-seller who had lost an arm during the war; and Ramsamy Moodlai, a hawker who had lived in the Transvaal since 1888. On 1 June 1910, the four Colonies of Natal, Transvaal, the Cape and the Orange Free State – previously autonomous if not independent – became constituents of a larger entity, known officially as the Union of South Africa. There would be a new, whites-only parliament, with a prime minister and cabinet working under the (nominal) supervision of a governor-general sent out from London. Superficially, the Union in South Africa followed the pattern laid down by other British dominions. In 1867 the different provinces of Canada came  together and formed a central parliament. In 1900 the Australian colonies did likewise. The South African case, however, differed in one crucial respect from its predecessors. At the time of the Union, the white settlers were very far from being a majority in a land they claimed as their own. On 2 June, Gandhi issued a letter to the press, noting that for his people the day of Union was marked by fresh arrests. Those in jail included ‘Mr Joseph Royeppen, the Barrister and Cambridge Graduate’ and ‘a cultured Indian and representative Parsee, Mr Sorabji’. The Indian leader pointedly and poignantly asked: What can a Union under which the above state of things is continued mean to Asiatics, except that it is a combination of hostile forces arrayed against them? The Empire is supposed to have become stronger for the Union. Is it to crush by its weight and importance Asiatic subjects of the Crown? It was no doubt right and proper that the birth of Union should have been signalised for the Natives of South Africa by the clemency of the Crown towards [the Zulu chief] Dinizulu. Dinizulu’s discharge will naturally fire the imagination of the South African Natives. Will it not be equally proper to enable the Asiatics in South Africa to feel that there is a new and benignant spirit abroad in South Africa by conceding their demands, which are held, I make bold to say, to be intrinsically just by nine out of every ten intelligent people in this Continent?22 The Union of Europeans in South Africa was hostile to the Asians who lived in the country. However, individual Europeans were sympathetic, none more so than Hermann Kallenbach. On 30 May, the architect had donated a farm outside Johannesburg to the Indians. So long as the struggle lasted, ‘passive resisters and their indigent families’ could live on the farm ‘free of any rent or charge’.The farm was large – more than 1,000 acres – and had many fruit trees, two wells and a small spring. The ground was mostly level, but a small hillock rose at one edge of the property. The property was twenty-two miles from the city, yet close to a railway station named Lawley. Gandhi, with Kallenbach’s endorsement, chose to name the farm after Tolstoy. As a vegetarian himself, Kallenbach prohibited shooting on the farm. He also eschewed, as far as possible, the use of machinery and hired labour. A reporter who visited shortly after the gift described Tolstoy Farm as ‘an earnest attempt to bring East and West nearer along (shall I say) right lines and by easy though slow stages.’ Tolstoy Farm had further consolidated the friendship between the European Jew, Hermann Kallenbach and the Indian Bania, Mohandas Gandhi. Yet some  other Western friends of Gandhi were not equally enamoured of the experiment. Henry Polak had presented Ruskin’s Unto This Last to Gandhi, thinking it would appeal to his friend’s romantic ruralism. It did, and the founding of Phoenix followed. But the Polaks themselves did not spend much time at the settlement. They were anti-racist egalitarians without being anti-industrial polemicists. Millie especially had found the facilities at Phoenix primitive, and the company confining. The Polaks were all city people, and quite happy (and proud) to be so. Likewise, some of Gandhi’s closest Indian companions were not ascetic in their disposition. He himself was very aware that not all protesters were seekers. He knew that few satyagrahis would become sevaks, servants of society in the deeper sense. He knew that Gujarati merchants, whether Hindu or Muslim, did not like working with their hands. So, for this new venture, he asked them merely to contribute money and materials. The work of settling and improving Tolstoy Farm would be done by the Gandhi family, by Indians from castes and communities more accustomed to hard labour, and by the owner and patron himself. The first residents of the new settlement were Gandhi, his son Manilal, and Kallenbach. They were soon joined by a group of Tamils, among them Thambi Naidoo and his family. The Indians worked with African labourers on constructing new buildings, carrying stones from the hill to the site. Friends and supporters in Johannesburg sent mattresses, blankets, towels, utensils, fruits and vegetables. The donors were not all Indian; thus the wife of a Nonconformist minister sent forty pounds of home-made marmalade, while the Cantonese Club of Johannesburg gave rice, sugar, monkey-nuts and paraffin.26 By the end of June, a school was functioning on the farm. It had five pupils, including Manilal and Ramdas Gandhi. Their father was the main teacher. In late July, Kasturba Gandhi arrived to join her husband. The family unit had been restored, after a five-year period in which the father had been mostly in Johannesburg, the mother wholly at Phoenix, and the sons shuttling in between. Since Kasturba had the company of other women, she was not lonely. And the experience for her boys was transformative. Cooking, cleaning, digging the land – his sons, Gandhi told his nephew Maganlal, were no longer  engrossed in thought as [they] used to be in Phoenix. This is the result of manual labour. In pampering the corpulent body that has been given to us and pretending that we earn [our living] by our intellect, we have become sinners and are tempted to fall into a thousand and one evil ways. I regard the Kaffirs, with whom I constantly work these days, as superior to us. What they do in their ignorance we have to do knowingly. In outward appearance we should look just like the Kaffirs.27 Working alongside the Africans, Gandhi came to a clearer realization of their predicament. ‘The negroes alone are the original inhabitants of this land,’ he wrote in Indian Opinion. ‘We have not seized the land from them by force; we live here with their goodwill. The whites, on the other hand, have occupied the country forcibly and appropriated it to themselves’. The formulation was striking, as well as new – once accustomed to praising British values and British institutions, Gandhi now pointed instead to the illegitimacy of their presence and rule in Africa.28 Clearly, he had progressed considerably from the unsympathetic and hostile attitude towards Africans he had displayed in his first years in Natal. When the annual high school examinations for 1910 were held in Pretoria, Indian Opinion asked why Africans were not allowed to sit with their white peers. In previous years, all students had taken the examination together. This time, the management of the Town Hall – where the exams were held – passed a resolution that no African or any other person of colour would be allowed to enter the building.Gandhi thought this provocation enough for passive resistance. ‘In a country like this’, he remarked, the Coloured people are placed in an extremely difficult situation. We think there is no way out of this except satyagraha. Such instances are a natural consequence of the whites’ refusal to treat the Coloured people as their equals. It is in order to put an end to this state of affairs that we have been fighting in the Transvaal, and it is not surprising that the fight against a people with deep prejudice should take a long time.30 Shortly afterwards, Gandhi received a letter from two friends in Natal, who felt that his having recently travelled third-class was demeaning to the leader and to the prestige of the community he represented. Gandhi answered that he wished to live like a poor man; besides, he ‘shuddered to read the account of the hardships the Kaffirs had to suffer in the third-class carriages in the Cape and I wanted to experience the same hardships myself.’ At Tolstoy Farm, the Gandhi family and the African labourers both worked under the direction of Hermann Kallenbach, who was both a trained architect and a superbly skilled mason and carpenter. The benefactor found rich fulfilment  in his gift and his work. ‘I have given up meat-eating, smoking and drinking, and practise asceticism,’ he wrote to his brother Simon. ‘What Tolstoy wants and what I too strive for, is to recognise the correct thing without disturbing my fellow man.’ Gandhi, meanwhile, had written to Tolstoy, telling him about the farm named after him and worked according to his principles. The seer wrote back, saying, ‘your work in Transvaal, which seems to be far away from the centre of our world, is yet the most fundamental and the most important to us [in] supplying the most weighty practical proof in which the world can now share and with which must participate not only the Christians but all the peoples of the world.’ He compared the work of the Indians to men in Russia refusing to serve in the military. The two struggles were joined, in Tolstoy’s mind, in a common, heroic endeavour. Thus, ‘however small may be the number of your participants in non- resistance and the number of those in Russia who refuse military service, both the one and the other may assert with audacity that “God is with us” and “God is more powerful than men”.’ Two months later Tolstoy died. Indian Opinion printed a commemorative issue, with a large portrait and several appreciations. Gandhi noted, not without pride, that ‘in his last days’ Tolstoy had extended ‘encouragement to the [Transvaal] satyagrahis’, assuring them ‘justice from God, if not from the rulers’. The Transvaal Government’s attempts to break the movement continued. In April–May 1910, several hundred satyagrahis, Indians and Chinese, were placed on ships bound for Madras and Bombay. The deportation intensified the resolve of the resisters, and also consolidated support for them within India. Henry Polak was at hand to receive the deportees as they disembarked in Madras and Bombay, sending some of them straight back to South Africa, while organizing receptions for those who chose to stay behind.  Polak was aided by the liberal reformer G. A. Natesan, editor and publisher of the Madras-based Indian Review. Natesan was a Tamil, and hence well placed to look after the Tamil-speaking satyagrahis who arrived in Madras. The Indian Review published representative accounts of the deportees’ suffering. One Subramanya Asari had gone to Natal in about 1900 to join his father, who was a  jeweller. Joining the satyagraha out of solidarity with the Transvaal Indians, he was arrested, deported to Delagoa Bay, and then put with fifty-nine other resisters on a ship to India. They travelled in great discomfort on deck, with meagre rations. A satyagrahi named Narayanaswamy fell sick and died on board. The spirit of his compatriots was undaunted; a few days after the steamer carrying them landed in Madras, twenty-six of the sixty deportees, themselves born or domiciled in Natal, boarded a ship back to Durban. The reports in the Indian Review often spoke of the veneration in which satyagrahis from South India held their Gujarati leader. Consider the case of P. K. Naidoo. A barber in Johannesburg, he was an autodidact who had taught himself to speak French, Zulu and Hindi in addition to his native Telugu. Arrested in January 1908 for not possessing a registration certificate, he was tried and convicted along with Gandhi. When he arrived at the jail a few hours later, Naidoo was ‘struck with horror to see my leader attired in the native criminal convict’s garb. My wish, in the present instance, was to make a noise, but Mr Gandhi, who was acquainted with my deportment, at once, told me in a mild tone: “Simply do what you are told, Naidoo.”’ The barber was put in prison garb and taken to his cell. Next morning, he was appalled to find that the meal consisted of mealie porridge. ‘None of us, excluding Mr Gandhi, who wished to show that it was good food, relished it as [we did] our breakfast at home.’ Naidoo was released, but rearrested a second time, and then a third. At this point he had not seen Gandhi for eight months. ‘When I was out he was in, and when he was out I was in, and on this occasion he was gone to London.’ In May 1910, on release from his fifth term, P. K. Naidoo was met at the prison gate by a large contingent, including Cachalia and Kallenbach. Of his reception committee Naidoo remarked that ‘Mr Gandhi, whom I had not met for 17 months, was naturally the most attractive.’ Among those deported to Madras was the Chinese leader Leung Quinn. In an essay for Natesan’s journal he explained why he and his compatriots had joined Gandhi’s struggle. The laws in the Transvaal, ‘erected by reason of racial antipathies and jealousies’, were such that even Chinese ambassadors welcomed in the courts of Europe would not be allowed into the colony. It was, said Quinn, ‘not possible for us, who belong to an ancient and dignified civilisation to sit silent under such a flagrant insult’. Judging that the ‘honour of Asia was at  stake’, the Chinese joined the Indian resisters. Quinn told his Indian audience that ‘the Transvaal colonists have foolishly thrown down the gauntlet to the whole of Asia. Neither they nor other Europeans should be surprised if Asiatics, as a body, take it up.’ The presence of the deportees and the sympathies they aroused worried officials of the Raj, who thought they might inflame nationalist sentiments in India. The Madras Government found their presence ‘very embarrassing’. The deportees were being treated as martyrs. Their troubles in South Africa evoked feelings that were ‘rapidly becoming more bitter and more widespread’.In Bombay, the arrival of shiploads of satyagrahis from the Transvaal attracted the attentions of the Commissioner of Police. He went to meet the deportees, finding them in ‘fairly good spirits and quite ready to converse amicably’. The Commissioner nonetheless wished the process of deportation would stop, ‘in view of the capital which the local agitator can make of it if he chooses.’ The Transvaal Government had hoped the deportations would demoralize the satyagrahis and demolish the satyagraha. As it happened, the adverse publicity in India helped infuse it with, among other things, a new source of funds. When the deportations began, in April 1910, the balance in the ‘Passive Resistance Fund Account’ of the Natal Bank in Johannesburg stood at slightly over £3,000. This, Gandhi told Gokhale, would only last them till the end of the year. He noted that he had himself given the bulk of his earnings to the cause, as had ‘a European friend’ (Kallenbach).Hearing of the deportations, Ratan Tata wrote to Gokhale in July 1910 that he wished to make a further donation of Rs 25,000. He asked that the matter be kept private for the moment, in reserve for the psychological moment when the publication of it in a similar sensational manner to my last donation, might again touch the emotions of some people, and goad them into making a second effort to keep alive this struggle of our cause in South Africa, which is getting so painfully feeble day by day owing to the want of financial support.41 Gokhale wrote back that the atmosphere in India was not very encouraging. He did not think that a public announcement of Tata’s bequest would stimulate other donations. The philanthrophist found it hard to accept that ‘the finer feelings are dead amongst all our countrymen’, but deferred to the judgement of the man on the spot. In that case, he would send the money directly to Gandhi. As he saw it,  once the struggle in South Africa is given up, the whites will see that Indians have not grit enough to fight to a finish and that wherever Indians are not wanted, the whites have only to persist long enough, to drive them out of any country. It is pitiful to see a handful of Indians suffering and fighting for the rights of a whole nation, whilst that nation sits inertly and watches the struggle with absolute indifference.42 Ratan Tata had asked Gokhale to ‘embody my views in a letter to Mr Ghandi [sic]’.43 What Gokhale wrote to Gandhi is unrecorded. We do know however that on 18 November 1910, Ratan Tata sent Gandhi a cheque for Rs 25,000, with a brief note saying that ‘the admiration and good wishes of all true Indians are with you in your noble work.’ Meanwhile, on his tour across India, by his enthusiasm and his eloquence Polak had proved Tata right and Gokhale wrong. In nine months on the road he had raised over Rs 50,000, with contributions, big and small, coming from Hindu Maharajas, Muslim nawabs, Parsi millionaires, Christian clergymen, and secularized members of a growing middle class. In the last week of August 1910, after nearly a year in his friend’s homeland, Henry Polak returned to South Africa. At a farewell meeting in Madras, Annie Besant paid tribute to his work for the Indians of the Transvaal. ‘Himself of a persecuted race, whose blood has been shed in every country in Europe,’ Polak had not ‘allowed himself to be soured and embittered by the suffering of his kinsfolk. He has shown himself to possess a heart softened, and … he finds in the suffering of others a reason for taking the cause of the other.’ From Madras Polak took a train to Bombay, where he boarded a ship for South Africa. He arrived in Durban at daybreak on 28 September. Gandhi was there to receive him, along with some 400 other Indians. A few at least had been inspired to go there by Sheikh Mehtab, Gandhi’s once-estranged friend who was now a vigorous cheerleader for his movement. In a poem in Indian Opinion Mehtab told his compatriots to come to the Point to greet their English friend. For Polak awakened India He declared that no indentured labourers will come He has conquered a citadel [of power] Honour him, putting flower garlands on his back.  Their welcome, continued the poet, should confirm the spirit of inter-religious solidarity. When Polak came ashore, the Indians must Sing the songs of Vande Matram and Allah Akbar Shower him with basketfuls of pearls Indians with shawls or Turkish caps Pick up the arrow of unity and Shoot disunity down.47 After a few days at Phoenix, the friends returned together to the city. On the morning of 4 October, Gandhi and Polak went down to the Point to welcome a shipload of Natal Indians previously deported to Madras and Bombay for illegally entering the Transvaal. Here Polak told a reporter that ‘our programme will remain, as it has always been, not one of violence or attempts to disturb, but one of suffering on the part of our people, who intend to go on enduring these hardships until they make the authorities ashamed of themselves.’ That same evening, the Indians of Natal threw a large reception for Polak. A little Tamil girl presented him with a rose buttonhole ‘amid continuous cheering’. An address was read out on behalf of the hosts: this saluted Polak’s ‘noble and self-sacrificing work’ in India, by which, he was told, ‘you have identified yourself with our troubles and sorrows in a manner in which very few Europeans or Indians have.’ Among the Indians, Henry Polak was known as ‘Keshavlal’, since he had long, uncut locks like Lord Krishna himself. But the name also suited him in other respects, since he was likewise playful, mischievous, a romantic at heart, and yet possessed of a sharp political intelligence. Gandhi’s other great European friend, Kallenbach, was known as ‘Hanuman’, to denote his unquestioning devotion to his Lord (here Gandhi rather than Ram) and his willingness to put his muscles (in this case, financial as well as physical) at his master’s service. The reception for Henry Polak in Durban was followed by a meeting to discuss the current state of the movement. When Gandhi began speaking, in English, the crowd shouted: ‘Tamil! Tamil!’ Gandhi answered that if General Smuts sent him to jail again he would have the time, and leisure, to learn their language. Meanwhile, he passed on the responsibility to his nephew Maganlal, who was now managing Phoenix and Indian Opinion on Gandhi’s behalf. Since his elder brother Chhagan was in London (on a scholarship funded by Pranjivan Mehta),  Magan, in Natal, would study Tamil seriously, and thus become a bridge between his uncle and the most committed of his supporters. Gandhi wrote regularly to Magan asking about his progress. ‘Do not give up your study of Tamil,’ began one letter. ‘I have a constant feeling that you alone and none else will be able to master Tamil,’ said another. Gandhi was now very keen to be arrested. Every month, he would visit Natal and cross back into the Transvaal without registration papers. The authorities stayed their hand, but when, in early November, he brought with him some other Indians, they detained a woman named Mrs Sodha, whose husband was already in prison. The police declared her to be an illegal alien. Gandhi was able to get the case adjourned, and to proceed with Mrs Sodha and her children to Tolstoy Farm. He wired the Minister of the Interior, General Smuts, seeking permission to keep them on the farm till Mr Sodha had served out his term. He pointed out that ‘hitherto Indian women have been left unmolested.’ When Smuts answered that the law would take its course, Gandhi told the press that while the ‘Government are at war with Indian males’, the ‘community was, however, unprepared for an unchivalrous attack on its womanhood’. Mrs Sodha was not a competitor in trade; indeed, ‘a meeker woman’ could not perhaps be found anywhere in South Africa. ‘Whatever may be their views on Asiatic immigration or on the question of general passive resistance,’ asked Gandhi, ‘will not the Christian men and women of this Union rise in unanimous protest against this latest parody of administration on the part of the Government?’ The invocation of the rulers’ faith was in character. Gandhi was calling on them to recognize the divine rather than devilish aspects of Christianity, and to have empathy for the suffering of all religions (and nationalities). To show them the Path, Gandhi organized an inter-faith picnic on Christmas Day, turning Tolstoy Farm, otherwise a place of work and contemplation, into a theatre of joy and celebration. Three hundred guests from Johannesburg joined the fifty-odd settlers for the festivities. The children ‘were let loose on Mr Kallenbach’s fruit trees, which … they did not treat with any very great consideration. They plucked both ripe and unripe fruit, and what they could not eat they took for future consumption in their kerchiefs.’ At noon, lunch was served, khichri and vegetables followed by plum pudding. Afterwards a series of running and  jumping competitions were held. The eating and playing was supervised by two Jewish ladies, Sonja Schlesin and Mrs William Vogt.53 Five days after this party, the case of Mrs Ramabhai Sodha came up for hearing in Johannesburg. The accused had with her two small children, aged eight months and three years respectively. Gandhi served as her lawyer and interpreter. The proceedings were watched by a full house, mostly of Indians, but also including Gandhi’s European friends (and followers) Joseph Doke, Hermann Kallenbach, Mrs Vogt and Sonja Schlesin. The prosecution claimed that Mrs Sodha was brought to Transvaal ‘for the purpose of agitating against the Asiatic Act’. Gandhi said this was ‘entirely wrong’. In Natal, ‘Mrs Sodha was living in a lonely place. And she could be best protected at Tolstoy Farm.’ The judge sentenced Mrs. Sodha to a £10 fine and one month’s imprisonment, but she was released on bail pending an appeal. The echoes of the Sodha case reached London, where the Colonial Office received a petition of protest from the All India Muslim League. Gandhi was said to have rescued Mrs Sodha and her children from ‘a state of destitution’. Her prosecution was thus ‘particularly harsh, if not actually cruel’. Sent this petition by London, the Transvaal Ministers answered that Gandhi had crossed the border with Mrs Sodha ‘with the deliberate purpose of embarrassing the Government’. In view of the fact that ‘many thousands of pounds sterling have recently been collected in India and elsewhere by the emissaries of the Transvaal British Indian Association in support of resistance to the laws and the Government,’ said the Ministers, ‘it is difficult to understand why Mrs Sodha should be in the destitute condition alleged, or why the cost of her removal from Johannesburg should have been undertaken unless there existed an ulterior motive.’ The claims were in conflict, but not, in fact, irreconcilable. Gandhi may have had both objectives in mind. By providing succour to the Sodha family, he was issuing a fresh challenge to the authorities as well.  In the first weeks of 1911, the government gazette printed a proposed new Immigration Bill. This would repeal the existing legislation, but did not explicitly protect the wives and children of domiciled Asiatics. It specified a language test for new entrants to the Transvaal, but was ambiguous about  whether Indians who passed the test would be allowed in. Polak wrote to Gokhale that the last clause was crucial; on its interpretation would depend the Indians’ response. ‘Gandhi is fairly optimistic,’ he remarked. ‘I am not so satisfied.’ Gandhi asked a senior European lawyer in Johannesburg to analyse the bill on his behalf. He also wrote to the Minister of the Interior, who answered that, yes, educated Asiatics admitted under the new bill would not be made to register. Gandhi now said that if the Government clarified the position of women and children, he would ‘advise the community in the Transvaal to send a formal acquiescence [to the bill], and passive resistance will then naturally end.’ On 3 March, Gandhi wrote to Maganlal that ‘it appears that the struggle will definitely come to an end.’ In that case, most Indians would leave Tolstoy Farm, but Gandhi and Kasturba, and their sons, would stay on. ‘How can I leave Mr Kallenbach immediately after the struggle is over?’ he said. His friend had spent £600 on the building, and Gandhi and his sons would try ‘and make good as much of the loss as possible by physical labour’. Preoccupied with the negotiations, Gandhi had neglected Kasturba. She was suffering from bleeding and acute pain, and may have been passing through menopause. One day Gandhi found her in tears. He joked that if she died, there was plenty of wood on the Farm to cremate her. That got her laughing, and ‘half the pain disappeared with the laugh’. Thereafter the two of them decided to go on a salt-free diet, and her health improved. ‘The bleeding stopped immediately,’ he told Maganlal. Gandhi could now return to the negotiations, which had turned difficult again. As the Immigration Bill passed through its second and third reading, General Smuts met with stiff opposition from MPs belonging to the Orange Free State. Any law now framed had to be relevant to the Union as a whole. But the Free Staters insisted that whatever the concessions in other provinces, no Asians would be permitted to enter their territory. Gandhi sent Smuts’ secretary a series of telegrams in protest. They were not concerned, he said, with ‘individual material gain’, or with ‘whether a single Asiatic actually enters [the] Free State’, but they must, on a matter of principle, oppose a racial bar in any legislation intended to replace the Transvaal laws against which their struggle had been aimed. He pointed out that the ‘absence of any substantial Indian population’ in  the Free State ‘effectively bar [the] entrance of educated Indians’. However, if the Union Parliament ratified the Free State policy, they were then ‘saying to the world [that] no Indian even though a potentate can legally enter and reside in a Province of the Union’. Smuts replied that this was an ‘absolutely new contention’ on the part of the Indians, which would ‘exasperate the European community and complicate the position even further’. Glossing this letter to Joseph Doke, Gandhi said that the General’s remark ‘reminds me of what the demonstrators did to inflame the crowd in the December of 1896 and the January of 1897. The European community is certainly not exasperated, but General Smuts is, and he wants to impart his own exasperation to the community.’ Gandhi was not far wrong. In a conversation with the Governor-General’s Private Secretary, Smuts outlined his views on the question. ‘If South Africa were to be a white man’s country,’ said the General, then more Europeans had to be brought in. At present white immigration was mostly Jewish. Jews (in his view) were ‘apt to take up activities of a parasitical nature’; ‘although ethnically and socially they remained a distinct entity’, they were at least white. Smuts was ‘not prepared to face the alternative of the whole retail trade of the country falling into Asiatic hands. As between the two evils of the undesirable business methods of white traders on the one hand and the unlimited extension of Asiatic trading on the other, he did not hesitate to choose the former.’ Meanwhile, the Prime Minister, Louis Botha, had received a petition asking that all Asiatics be deported from South Africa. Botha answered that he would personally like the Indians to be sent away, but operating as they did under the British flag they had to be more careful. The matter continued to vex his Government; as he joked in a speech to his constituents, ‘General Smuts had wasted away to a shadow (laughter) when as a result of his incessant efforts to settle the question, the gaols were filled.’ L. W. Ritch was now in Cape Town, from where he sent a report on the mood in the Union Parliament. ‘The feeling against the admission of any more of our people is overwhelming,’ he remarked: There was only one chorus [in Parliament]. Different representatives of different interests opposed the Bill because it appeared to threaten the particular interests of their class, but there was undoubted  unanimity about exclusion. We have, I think, been wise to restrict our demands to existing rights of persons already domiciled.62 The last sentence is crucial – it differentiated the position of Gandhi and company from radicals who wished there to be no bar to immigration at all. Among these radicals was P. S. Aiyar, the Durban journalist and editor of the Tamil-oriented African Chronicle, who by now had begun to move away from the incremental moderation of Gandhi. In March 1911, Aiyar complained to Gokhale that ‘Gandhi and Polak do not wish to press forward our claims for freedom of movement throughout the Union.’ If provincial barriers were not removed, argued Aiyar, then ‘the last four years of terrific suffering and the great sacrifice made by our Motherland towards their cause would result in no practical material benefits’. Aiyar’s proposal implied a wholesale redistribution of the Indian population throughout South Africa. But would the white residents (and rulers) of Transvaal, the Cape and the Free State have permitted thousands of Indian traders and craftsmen from Natal to come to their states seeking ‘practical material benefits’? Gandhi understood the impossibility of such a demand and hence set his sights lower, on securing the rights of individuals and their families in the provinces in which they already lived, and on opening the door for a small, incremental immigration of a few educated Indians a year. However, the extreme demands of the radicals prejudiced even the modest claims of the moderates. ‘Asiatic demands,’ wrote an influential white paper in Johannesburg, ‘often display a tendency to grow bigger whenever any part of them is conceded.’ This was ‘one of the dangers of the new policy. There is no finality about it. Once you begin to allow a certain number to enter, you invite an application for increasing the number.’ The paper was in ‘no doubt [that] if the figure was fixed at one hundred and twenty tomorrow, they would be asking for twelve hundred next week.’ Gandhi and Polak were actually asking only for six new entrants a year. Even this many MPs were unwilling to concede. Seeking to break the deadlock, Gandhi met General Smuts in Cape Town on 27 March, and immediately afterwards set down a record of the meeting. It opened with the General saying that to ask for (theoretical) entry to the Free State was both ‘very unreasonable’ and ‘absolutely new’. Gandhi said what existed was a racial bar, and they had  always opposed that. As he put it, ‘the combined effect of the Free State Law and the New Bill will be to shut out the Nizam of Hyderabad [the richest Indian potentate], and I assure you the passive resisters will fight against it.’ Smuts answered that ‘the Free Staters will never consent’ to the change proposed by the Indians. Gandhi responded that ‘it is your duty to persuade them’. Smuts said that he would talk again to Free State MPs. As the meeting came to a close, Smuts asked Gandhi what he was doing in Johannesburg. Gandhi answered that he was looking after the families of passive resisters. Smuts said that ‘it has hurt me more than you to imprison these people. It has been the unpleasantest episode of my life to imprison men who suffer for their conscience.’ To this Gandhi riposted, ‘And yet you are persecuting Mrs. Sodha.’ The notes end here, with the note-writer having the last word. There does not appear to be another version in the Smuts papers.65 In April 1911, Gandhi went again to Cape Town. This time he stayed four weeks, furiously lobbying MPs to make the changes he desired in the Immigration Law. In the absence of Sonja Schlesin – who had stayed behind in Johannesburg to keep the office going – Gandhi had to type his correspondence himself. And there was plenty of this: letters seeking appointments, letters seeking clarifications, letters stating his own point of view. His fingers were so tired that he used his left hand to write to his family. In Cape Town, Gandhi met MPs of different parties and provinces. Two weeks into his stay, General Smuts granted him a further appointment. They met at 11.30 a.m. on 19 April, and spoke for forty minutes. Once more, Gandhi wrote down, by hand, his recollections of the meeting. Smuts said the Free Staters were still opposed to admitting Asiatics. He could defeat them in the Assembly but not in the Senate, so thought it best to postpone the bill to the next session of Parliament. Meanwhile, he wanted Gandhi to withdraw his agitation. ‘I want time,’ said the General. ‘I shall yet beat the Free Staters. But you should not be aggressive.’ In the course of the conversation, Smuts said that ‘this country is the Kaffirs’. We whites are a handful. We do not want Asia to come in.’ Then he paused, and continued: ‘I do not know how your people spread. They go everywhere. I have now more petitions against [Indian] dealers. My difficulty of the future will be  regarding them.’ He then changed the subject, and the following conversation ensued: S. Gandhi, what are you doing for a living? G. I am not practising at present. S. But how then are you living? Have you plenty of money? G. No. I am living like a pauper, the same as other passive resisters on Tolstoy Farm. S. Whose is it? G. It is Mr Kallenbach’s. He is a German. S. (Laughing) Oh, old Kallenbach! He is your admirer, eh? I know. G. I do not know that he is my admirer. We are certainly very great friends. S. I must come and see the Farm – where is it? G. Near Lawley. S. I know – on the Vereeniging line. What is the distance from the station? G. About twenty minutes. We shall be pleased to see you there. S. Yes, I must come one day. The same evening, Gandhi wrote to Smuts confirming that, to use military terms, our conversation implies a truce for a year or longer, i.e., until the Parliament meets again … I am sincerely anxious to help you, but I do not know how I could promise inactivity on the part of the passive resisters. What you, the Imperial Government and I want to avoid is the ferment. I fear that, in the nature of things, it is well nigh impossible to avoid it if the matter is not closed during this season. Gandhi was suggesting that he did not have full control over his sometimes militant followers. By way of calming tempers, he asked Smuts to make three assurances: that in the next session the existing legislation would be repealed, that passive resisters who had the right do so could now freely register in Transvaal, and that, pending legislation, up to six educated passive resisters in Transvaal would be allowed to remain as ‘educated immigrants’. If this were done, he did ‘not anticipate any difficulty in persuading my countrymen to suspend passive resistance’. The General’s secretary wrote back, agreeing to these conditions, and conveying Smuts’ hope that this temporary settlement ‘will leave all concerned free to devote their energies to securing a more lasting one’. On 24 April, with the truce in place, Gandhi left Cape Town to return to Johannesburg. On the way back, he remembered that he had forgotten one crucial concession. The provisional settlement envisaged the release from prison  of all passive resisters. But he had omitted to specify that these should be Chinese as well as Indian. He rang up Smuts’ secretary, E. F. C. Lane, to make this clear, and then set it down in writing. ‘There are now,’ he said, ‘more Chinese than Indian passive resisters in gaol. I am quite sure that General Smuts will not expect Indian passive resisters to desert their Chinese fellow sufferers. They naturally ask for the same protection for the Chinese passive resisters as for themselves’ – namely, that they be released from jail, be allowed to voluntarily register, and to secure their own rights of domicile and livelihood in Transvaal. With Leung Quinn away in India, Gandhi had taken it upon himself to represent the interests of the Chinese, too. On 27 April 1911 a meeting of Indians was held in Johannesburg’s Hamidia Hall to discuss the correspondence between Gandhi and Smuts. Coovadia, Thambi Naidoo, Joseph Royeppen, Imran Kadir, Sodha, Adajania and Gandhi himself spoke in favour of accepting the settlement. However, ‘the greatest difficulty that the Indian leaders had to face [was] the almost ineradicable suspicion the rank and file entertain regarding the Government’s motives.’ There was ‘a very heated controversy’, but ‘calmness ultimately prevailed’, with the meeting deciding to accept the provisional settlement, only five members (of an estimated 500 present) dissenting.This, Gandhi told a reporter, ‘would simply mean that the British Indians, as also the Chinese, would cease to court arrest and imprisonment pending the forthcoming legislation’. Gandhi was hopeful that Smuts would see suitable legislation through the next session of Parliament. The Star of Johannesburg had likewise concluded that the Indian question in the Transvaal was now closed. The day after the meeting in the Hamidia Hall, it ran a long article rehearsing the history of the conflict. The rights of domicile of the Indians were, it recalled, rejected by ‘practically the whole white community’. In deference to their wishes, the Government passed Act 2 of 1907. Then Mr Gandhi appeared on the scene. He took up a hostile attitude to this law, and his personality was so marked that from the start he secured practically the undivided support of the entire Indian community of the Transvaal, and material assurances of his countrymen in India and elsewhere. The controversy has gone through many phases since then, and through them all the authorities were confronted with an unflinching resoluteness and implacable passivity on the part of Gandhi and his followers. Rather small in stature and frail in constitution, Gandhi has bound the Indians together by his earnestness and his belief in the justice of his cause. There was no rigorous pledge or blind  obedience demanded, and the appeal to conscience has been sufficient to enable him to carry his campaign from the Commons to the Lords to the very foot of the Throne. The cry that a colour bar was enacted by the force of law in a British Colony against the people of the great Dependency of the East which acknowledges the King Emperor was sufficient to rouse deep feelings of animosity. The Indians in the Transvaal played their part in a remarkable manner. Like the religious valiants of Huguenot times, they embraced the hardships and tasks that were in the power of the authorities to enforce. Some three thousand five hundred have been imprisoned. Gandhi himself has been in jail three times, his son eight times, and most of the prominent Indian merchants have experienced the rigours of confinement. The Star went on to say that ‘both parties to the struggle believed that they were in the right, and if the two central figures, General Smuts and Mr Gandhi, can now close an unpleasant chapter the relief that will be experienced will extend far beyond the limits of the Transvaal and South Africa.’ The Johannesburg Star was, by South African standards, a liberal paper. Still, its appreciation of Gandhi’s character and leadership was noteworthy. Gandhi would certainly have read the article, and may especially have liked the phrase ‘implacable passivity’, perhaps an unintended pun, but which finely captured the distinctive moral force of his practice of non-violent resistance. Having offered its assessment of the present and the past, the Star then let Gandhi speak on how he saw the future. He told the newspaper that he was handing over his legal practice in Johannesburg to L. W. Ritch. He said ‘his immediate intention’ now was to provide for the care and education of the children whose parents are now in necessitous circumstances, and then he intends to retire to his farm in Natal, and in the spells of leisure no doubt to come in closer touch with the philosophic musings of Tolstoy and to reap inspiration from the savants of his beloved India.69 Within a few weeks Gandhi was not so certain about his retirement. On 27 May – exactly a month after the meeting in the Hamidia Hall – Indian Opinion carried an editorial on the settlement, which had put Smuts ‘upon his honour’ to have the necessary laws passed in the next session of Parliament. If he did not, then ‘the same stubborn, calm and dignified resistance that was offered to General Smuts could next year with equal certainty of success be offered, if need be, to the mighty Union Parliament.’ The dilution of Gandhi’s optimism may have been a consequence of the pressure of the rank-and-file, who naturally and instinctively distrusted the  Government. One supposes that he had also been talking to the ever-sceptical Henry Polak.  With the settlement between Gandhi and Smuts, the workload of Henry Polak was now lightened, and he left to see his family in England. He took with him three boxes of grapes given by the Indians of Johannesburg to sustain him during the voyage. By leaving for London, Polak missed a banquet held at the Masonic Lodge in honour of the whites who had crossed racial boundaries. There had been, since 1908, an active committee of Europeans who raised funds for the struggle. Its chairman was William Hosken, who had abandoned his initial scepticism to take up an ‘open, consistent and persistent advocacy of the cause of passive resistance’. This advocacy lost Hosken his parliamentary seat in the elections of 1910. Yet his support continued. So did that of other white dissenters. The party at the Masonic Lodge was a collective tribute to them all. There were some sixty Europeans present, among them the Dokes (father, mother and children), Kallenbach, Ritch, Sonja Schlesin, Hosken, the jeweller Gabriel Isaac, the draper William Vogl and his wife, David Pollock, and the critic of Hind Swaraj Edward Dallow. The cooking of the meal (vegetarian, naturally) was supervised by Gandhi. Reporting the event, Indian Opinion said the committee chaired by Hosken represented the effective individual support that hundreds of Europeans on the Rand gave to the passive resistance hawkers; the few warders and other gaol officials who, out of sympathy, made the lives of passive resisters in the Transvaal prisons as free from difficulty as possible, whilst the hand of perhaps the majority of them was against these prisoners. It represents Miss Schlesin, at the mention of whose name at the banquet an enthusiastic applause rang through the hall and who has been working for the cause as no other man or woman, European or Asiatic, has worked. It represents an unknown railway refreshment waitress who was glad to serve bread and cheese for a passive resister, who was being taken under custody to Volksrust, for which she would not accept payment. It represents Mrs. Vogl who, as a direct result of the struggle, has, as a labour of love, established a sewing class for Indian women and girls.72 These words do not appear in the Collected Works, but they must surely have been written by Gandhi. The language is his, as are the sentiments, nurtured through twenty and more years of friendship with Europeans (from the  vegetarians of London onwards), friendships that survived his social objections to their laws and his moral objections to their civilization.            