 19 A Physician at Phoenix   With the Union of South Africa in place, there was no reason for Gandhi to remain in the Transvaal any more. Immigration laws were no longer colony- specific: any settlement General Smuts and he arrived at would apply to South Africa as a whole. And so, at the beginning of 1913, Gandhi moved to Natal, to live with his family and his disciples on the farm he had founded eight years previously. When he was based in Johannesburg, Gandhi had still considered Phoenix his home. It was where his family lived, where his journal was produced, where his ideas for moral regeneration were enacted. The settlers looked forward to his visits with keen anticipation. The children prepared welcome arches for him; or, if he arrived at night, lighted the path to his hut with candles. The affection was reciprocated; so long as they were not his own, and not yet teenagers, Gandhi delighted in the company of children. Chhaganlal’s son recalled how the patriarch carried them across his shoulder, rolled them down a sloping garden plot, showed them his teeth fillings and – not least – cured their ailments by, in this case, prescribing raw tomatoes for boils. ‘Another thing that attracted me,’ remembered the boy, ‘was that he laughed more often than anyone in Phoenix in spite of being such an important person.’ When Gandhi moved to Phoenix in January 1913, the school had thirty children. Teachers and students worked on the farm from 6 to 8 a.m. After breakfast Gandhi took the boys to the classroom, while the men went off to the press. In the afternoons, while someone else took class, Gandhi worked at the press himself. Dinner, at 5.30, was followed by songs and prayer. From 7.30 to 9 p.m. Gandhi supervised Manilal’s lessons, in a belated recognition of the special obligations of biological parenthood. In the nine years since the settlement was founded, it had made steady progress. The hedges were trim and neat, marking out fields that produced an  array of vegetables and fruits, among them succulent pineapples. The homes were furnished; some even had (as Millie Polak noted appreciatively) ‘attractive curtains at the windows’. The common areas included the river, open grounds, shrubs and trees, and a large one-room structure that served as a school in the day and as a meeting-place in the evening. Every Sunday the residents of Phoenix gathered for an inter-faith prayer meeting. Passages from the Gita and the New Testament (among other texts) were read, and hymns in Gujarati and English sung. The founder’s own favourites included ‘Lead, Kindly Light’ and ‘The Hymn of Consecration’. An admittedly partisan observer wrote that ‘perhaps in no place in the world’ were these hymns ‘sung with greater fervour and meaning than in that little lamp-lit corrugated-iron room, where Mr Gandhi was the centre of the life of an assembled congregation of about twenty people, from East and West’. With Indian Opinion’s first issue for 1913, Gandhi began a weekly series in Gujarati called ‘General Knowledge about Health’. This drew on wide reading and, even more, on his own experiments and experiences. This ‘quack physician’ (to use Gandhi’s self-description) was critical of the modern dependence on drugs. ‘Once the [medicine] bottle enters a house,’ he complained, ‘it never leaves.’ He thought bad air to be the cause of most diseases. Dirty latrines and open-air urination fouled the atmosphere, as did the casual dumping of food peelings and garbage, and spitting – all practices common to Indians. He spoke of the dangers of drinking contaminated water, and explained how water could be cleaned and purified in homes. The self-taught physician turned next to substances to be eschewed or encouraged. ‘Drink, tobacco, hemp, etc., not only damage physical health,’ he said, ‘but also impair mental fitness and entail wasteful expenditure. We lose all our moral sense and become slaves to our weakness.’ Chillies, spices and salt were also to be avoided. Gandhi outlined a hierarchy of ideal and preferred diets. A purely fruit diet was the best, then fruit and vegetables with no salt or spices, then a mix of vegetables and meat. Last, and most deplorable, was a purely carnivorous diet. ‘Those who … subsist exclusively on flesh,’ remarked Gandhi, ‘need not detain us here. Their state is so vile that the very thought of them  should be enough to put us off meat-eating. They are not healthy in any sense of the term.’ In the last week of January 1913, Gandhi wrote to his son Harilal saying that he hoped to return to India quite soon. With him would come some of the boys he was schooling at Phoenix. ‘I should certainly be able to go if a law satisfying to our demands is passed,’ he remarked, ‘so it appears. I have therefore settled in Phoenix. I don’t wish to stir out from here for five months.’ As before, Gandhi’s optimism was misplaced. In February, he complained to Gokhale that the assurances given him by the ministers were not being honoured. ‘The Immigration Acts are being administered with an ever-growing severity. Wives of lawfully resident Indians are being put to great trouble and expense.’ In the third week of March, a judgment in a Cape Town court called into question the validity of Indian marriages. One Hassan Esop, a barber working in Port Elizabeth, had, while on holiday in India, married a lady named Bal Mariam. After his return, he applied for a permit for his wife to join him. Although Bal Mariam was his only wife, the court refused to allow her to join her husband, on the grounds that Islam permitted polygamy. ‘The courts of this country,’ said the judge, a Justice Searle, ‘have always set their faces against recognition of these so-called Mahommedan marriages as legal unions’, since a woman admitted as a wife could ‘be repudiated the next day after the arrival by the husband’. To the argument that at least one wife should be admitted, the judge said sarcastically, ‘I do not know whether it is to be the first that comes, or the first that is married.’ Hindu law did not ban polygamy either. Did this mean that only Christian marriages would be recognized as valid in South Africa? The judgement alarmed the Indians, whose concerns were forcefully articulated by Gandhi in an editorial in Indian Opinion: This decision means as from today all Hindu or Muslim wives living in South Africa lose their right to live there … a Hindu, Muslim or Parsi wife can live in this country only by the grace of the Government. It is quite on the cards that the Government will not permit any more wives to come in or that, if it does, it will entirely be a matter of favour … The remedy is entirely in our hands. Every Anjuman, every Dharma Sabha and every one of the [community] associations must respectfully submit to the Government that the law should be amended and that marriages solemnized under the rites of Indian religions should be recognized as legal. Any nation that fails to protect the honour of  its women, any individual who fails to protect the honour of his wife is considered lower in level than a brute.7 Gandhi’s own marriage had its good periods and bad. His children and his wife had to bear the brunt of his social and ethical experiments. But of his commitment to marriage as a social institution there could be no doubt. The Searle judgment, if interpreted literally and implemented vigorously, threatened to sunder husband from wife, mother from children. This would seriously damage the life of the Indian community in South Africa. Gandhi may also have worried that, in the absence of their wives, Indian men would patronize prostitutes. Hence his call to community organizations to mobilize in protest against the Searle judgment. He was heeded, and quickly. The judgment was delivered on 21 March; eight days later, a mass meeting of Indians was held at the Hamidia Hall in Johannesburg. The meeting expressed ‘deep distress and disappointment’ at the court verdict, which was calculated ‘to disturb Indian domestic relations, to break up established homes, to put husband and wife asunder, to deprive lawful children of their inheritance …’ The Indians wanted remedial legislation that recognized as valid any marriage solemnized under the rites of ‘the great religions of India’. If this was not forthcoming, then it became ‘the bounden duty of the community, for the protection of its womanhood and its honour, to adopt passive resistance’.8 This meeting was attended only by men, but the women were likewise outraged by the Searle judgment. Kasturba asked Gandhi whether this meant ‘that I am not your wife according to the laws of this country’. When he answered in the affirmative, she suggested that they should perhaps return to India. Gandhi said that would be cowardly, whereupon Kasturba asked, ‘Could I not, then, join the struggle and be imprisoned myself?’ Kasturba’s offer was a mark of her deep loyalty to her husband, and of her acquired understanding of his cause. Despite their very different temperaments, Gandhi and Kasturba had, over thirty years of marriage, developed a relationship of understanding and companionship, to which the word ‘love’ may also be applied. Back in 1901, Kasturba had resisted Gandhi giving back jewels presented to him for his work. Now, twelve years later, she was herself volunteering to go to jail. Thus she underlined her commitment to a marriage the  new law chose to regard as ‘invalid’; thus also she showed her solidarity with the Indian community as a whole. Reporting their conversation to Gokhale, Gandhi said, ‘this time the struggle, if it comes, will involve more sufferings than before.’ He did not want to ask the public in India for support; rather, ‘the plan would be to beg in S[outh] A[frica] from door to door.’ He thought ‘most of the settlers [at Phoenix] including the womenfolk will join the struggle. The latter feel they can no longer refrain from facing the gaol no matter what it may mean in a place like this. Mrs. Gandhi made the offer on her own initiative and I do not want to debar her.’ The resentment against the Searle judgment was felt equally in Natal and the Transvaal. In recent years, the Indians in these two provinces had tended to conduct their affairs separately. The marriage question bound them together once more. The Natalians were also very exercised by the continuance of the £3 tax. The Durban journalist P. S. Aiyar had convened several meetings asking for its removal. Aiyar wrote to the Prime Minister, General Botha, that a repeal of the tax would be ‘hailed with unbounded joy’ and ‘have a far-reaching influence on the consolidation and stability of the Empire’. The request, or plea, was disregarded. In April 1913 the Government released the draft of a new Immigration Bill. This had distinctly, and perhaps deliberately, failed to take the sentiments of Indians into account. It retained the £3 tax, while making the qualifications for domicile more stringent and inter-provincial migration for Indians more difficult. It did not allow appeals to courts, and rendered the status of wives and children uncertain and insecure. The Bill gave wide discretionary powers to officials, allowing them to keep out ‘any person or class of persons deemed … on economic grounds or on account of standard or habits of life to be unsuited to the requirements of the Union or any particular Province thereof’. In the third week of April, the Natal Indian Congress wired the Governor- General in protest. Unless the amendments it asked for were made, it said, the ‘Indian community will be obliged strenuously to oppose [the] Bill with all [the] resources in its power’.The same week, Gandhi travelled from Phoenix to Johannesburg, to attend a meeting at the Hamidia Hall. A large and excited crowd heard him say that since the Union Bill incorporated the worst features of provincial legislation, this time ‘the struggle might be prolonged and fierce’. L.  W. Ritch, speaking after him, said that ‘if he as an Englishman were settled in any country and found himself treated as his Indian brothers were, he would fight unto death’. The Interior Minister now was Abraham Fischer, a Free Stater who, on the Indian question, was even more hardline than General Smuts. Fischer defended the harshness of the Bill in Parliament. For the ‘self-preservation of the white man’, he said, it ‘was considered undesirable that this country should be encroached upon by Asiatics’. His predecessor, Smuts, had once complained to Gandhi about the intransigent attitude of the MPs from the Orange Free State. Fischer now praised them for having ‘shown from the start what was good for the country’. As for the contentious question of Indian marriages, the Minister told Parliament that ‘a man was entitled to have only one wife, which some people maintained was quite sufficient. (Laughter.) A European was not allowed the privilege of having more than one wife, and surely we were not going to give that privilege to non-Europeans? (Laughter.)’ A few liberal politicians opposed the Bill in Parliament. The Cape lawyer Morris Alexander called it a ‘serious infringement’ of the rights of Asiatics. W. P. Schreiner thought this was really an ‘Immigrants Restriction [rather than Regulation] Bill’; its provisions were contrary to the assurances given to Gokhale, whom Schreiner described as ‘one of the greatest men of the time’. The majority opinion, however, was solidly behind the Minister and his Bill, which was necessary for ‘the self-preservation of the white race in South Africa’. As one Boer MP put it, apart from ‘a few cranks’ the ‘unanimous opinion of [white] South Africa was against the importation of Asiatics’. Some of them wanted to go further, and deport the Asiatics already in the country. As Interior Minister, Smuts had at least been prepared to talk to Gandhi. His successor, however, treated Gandhi as an interloper. The lawyer, said Abraham Fischer, was ‘representing only that section of the Indian community in the Transvaal, which was known some three or four years back as the “Passive Resisters”.’ His secretary told Gandhi that the Minister did not accept that he was ‘acting on behalf of the entire Asiatic population of the Transvaal’. Later, when Gandhi asked for the Searle judgment to be overturned, the Minister answered that ‘from the earliest times, following the introduction of European civilization into South Africa, the law of the land has only recognised as a valid  union the marriage, by a recognised marriage officer, of one man to one woman, to the exclusion, while it lasted, of any other.’ The implications were enormous, and ominous. Marriages between Hindus and Muslims were solemnized in private ceremonies conducted by priests and imams, not before a registrar or marriage official appointed or recognized by the state. The Minister’s interpretation would make thousands of Indian marriages in South Africa illegal – among them Gandhi’s and Kasturba’s. In late April, Gandhi travelled from Phoenix to Johannesburg for a meeting of the Transvaal Indians. He asked whether they were ‘ready to undergo the ordeal’ of passive resistance. He trusted that, ‘as self-respecting men, they could not shirk it. They must be prepared to risk all for the honour of their womanhood, for the sake of their religions and for the good name of the country of their birth.’ The same week, he wrote in his newspaper asking Indians in the Cape and Natal to ‘wake up’. They too should come forward and be prepared to go to jail. Meanwhile, Henry Polak was peppering the Government of India and the Colonial Office with letters asking them to intervene. He outlined the Bill’s flaws, and suggested how they could be overcome. Gandhi would go down to Cape Town if required to talk with the ministers. But if negotiations failed, then a revival of passive resistance was ‘certain’, and Gandhi himself would ‘not hesitate to put personal inclination on one side in order to take his part in the struggle.’ Polak’s intervention angered the Interior Minister, who asserted that he had in the past carried out an ‘active campaign of mis-statement’ against the Government. Fischer had hoped ‘that by this time the Colonial Office would have formed a correct estimate of communications written by Polak; but apparently his highly coloured and sensational communications still find credence, or at least more consideration than they ought to have in that quarter.’ Two weeks later, the Interior Minister received a letter forwarded by another European supporter of the Indians. Sent by Sonja Schlesin on behalf of ‘over forty Indian ladies of Johannesburg professing the Hindu, the Mahomedan and the Christian faiths’, this said that if the law was not amended to recognize Indian marriages, the women would offer passive resistance along with their menfolk. Schlesin was here acting, and writing, as the Honorary Secretary of the  Transvaal Indian Women’s Association. Reproducing her lettter, Indian Opinion commented that Miss Schlesin held that office because of the knowledge of English and of South African politics that her ‘Indian sisters’ lacked. ‘Miss Schlesin, like the male European workers in South Africa for the Indian cause, demonstrates the unity of human nature, whether residing in a brown-skinned or a white-skinned body.’ The tribute to the white-skinned Sonja Schlesin was written by the brown- skinned Gandhi. To underscore the unity of human nature, Polak returned the compliment in another section of the newspaper, by praising Indian women for daring ‘to fight the Government rather than submit to the insult offered by the Searle judgment’. Polak hoped now that the men would rise as quickly to the challenge, since, as he put it, ‘“the larger the number of passive resisters the quicker the termination of the struggle” is a mathematical formula.’ Unlike Polak and Sonja Schlesin, Hermann Kallenbach was too mild and not political enough to lobby the Government on behalf of the Indians. However, in a series of private letters written at this time, he laid bare his own understanding of the character and personality of their leader. He also revealed his own plans, which were to accompany Gandhi to India as and when his friend moved there for good. The letters were addressed to British followers of Tolstoy, whom Kallenbach had befriended on his visit to that country in 1911. Here, in part, is what the architect told them about their fellow Tolstoyan. Hermann Kallenbach to George Ferdinand, 3 March 1913: I cannot describe the man’s character to you by letter, but I can only say that the more I have had the privilege of being with, and near him, the clearer I have recognized the utter unselfishness of his character. True, it is sometimes hard – very hard – to live near and with him, but it is also true that he cannot serve God and Mammon … My wishing to go to India is not really a pilgrimage in the right sense of the word. It is more that I clearly recognize how very deficient my character is in many respects, and that I am hoping that the life there will give me more energy to throw off this defectiveness. Hermann Kallenbach to Isabella Fyvie Mayo, 3 March 1913: As long as I know Mr G[andhi] he has always loaded upon himself work and responsibilities, which no ordinary ten men would undertake … I believe that on account of this desire to be of such great service to all, he can not in my opinion pay sufficient attention to his family and his nearer friends, and in still doing so he has to curtail his meals, do with less sleep and to make time here and there when necessity arises.  Hermann Kallenbach to Isabella Fyvie Mayo, 10 March 1913: If you would know him better you would also recognise that it is indeed somewhat difficult to be near him and with him, unless one covers the whole distance with him … [H]e is so severe with himself that he simply goes ahead, and it is a question of either being with him, or not being able to be near him. Hermann Kallenbach to Isabella Fyvie Mayo, 21 April 1913: Your judgement about Mr G[andhi] placing him next [to] Ruskin and Tolstoy is a true one, and if he lives, posterity will once recognize it. The devotion was intensely personal. Like Pranjivan Mehta, Kallenbach was clear that his friend would one day be recognized as a moral exemplar to his country and the world. But where Mehta saw in Gandhi’s qualities and personality the redemption of India, Kallenbach saw in them the route to the improvement of his own anguished, flawed self. Even as his European friend (or devotee) was praising Gandhi in private, Gandhi was being attacked in public by his Indian rival, the Durban journalist P. S. Aiyar. African Chronicle’s issue of 19 April 1913 carried an essay with the bald title: ‘Why Mr Gandhi is a Failure’. The lawyer’s politics, claimed the critic, have ‘resulted in no tangible good to anyone’. On the other hand, they had caused ‘endless misery, loss of wealth, and deprivation of existing rights’. Aiyar accused Gandhi of thinking ‘that he is an immutable, omnipotent Czar’, and Polak of seeing himself as a ‘white Dinizulu [the Zulu chief] for the Indians’. He charged both men with ‘rank arrogance and inordinate ambition’. He urged Gandhi now ‘to climb down from his high pedestal’, and to ‘make some sacrifice of his personal antipathies and prejudices’. Instead of ‘sulking in the tent at Phoenix’, and being ‘as shy to face an audience as an Indian bride’, Gandhi should ‘come to Durban and convene a caucus meeting of the leaders, and … have a free and frank exchange of ideas with the people’. The screed reeked of animosity, but also of ambition – Aiyar was pleading, rather desperately, to be heard. The challenge to Gandhi was followed by a meaningful remark about his chief lieutenant: ‘As for Mr Polak, a large body of Indians do not seem to care much to be led by this gentleman.’ Did Gandhi read Aiyar’s challenge? Did he read it as what – the bile that covered it notwithstanding – it really seems to be, a cry for attention, an appeal to be considered worthier than the Englishman Polak in being the second-in-  command of the Indian leader? The name of P. S. Aiyar does not figure in Gandhi’s memoirs of his South African days. We do know, from stray reports in Indian Opinion, that the two men knew each other, and had shared a common platform several times in Durban. But at least in print Gandhi steadfastly disregarded the taunts, the complaints, the challenges and the abusive remarks that came his way from the editor of the African Chronicle. This was Aiyar’s most strongly worded attack yet; and although Gandhi ignored it his admirers were compelled to respond. Some forty Tamils wrote to the African Chronicle declaring that ‘whatever your attacks may be upon Mr Gandhi, it will not deter us from being his faithful and staunch followers’. The editor printed their letter, appending a comment of his own, which urged the Tamils not to ‘subject themselves to be led by cattle, not knowing where the leader leads them whether to Heaven or to Hell’. As the private praise and public invective poured in, Gandhi carried on with his series on health. Part XIV paid attention to what leaves the body. ‘From the appearance of our faeces,’ remarked the author, ‘we can make out if we have eaten too much.’ The faeces of one who had eaten ‘only as much as he can comfortably digest’ would tend to be ‘small, well formed, darkish, sticky, dry and free from bad odour’. Part XVII, entitled ‘An Intimate Chapter’, was on brahmacharya, here deemed ‘the most important’ thing to promote good health. It implied not ‘merely refraining from contact with each other with such enjoyment in view, but also keeping the mind free from the very thought of it – one must not even dream about it’. In Gandhi’s view, the violation of brahmacharya was ‘the basic cause of pleasure-hunting, envy, ostentation, hypocrisy, anger, impatience, violent hatred and other such evils’. Once a couple had children, they must desist from sexual relations. ‘I, who was married in childhood,’ recalled this converted celibate, ‘was blinded [by lust] in childhood and had children while a mere child, awoke after many years and seem to have realized on awakening that I had been pursuing a disastrous course. If anyone learns from my mistakes and my experience and saves himself, I shall be happy to have written this chapter.’ Kallenbach may, among other things, have had this paragraph in mind when he wrote that Gandhi ‘is so severe upon himself that he simply goes ahead, and it  is a question of either being with him, or not being able to be near him.’  In May 1913, the Immigration Bill passed its second reading. Gandhi wrote to MPs and the Minister of the Interior, asking that the £3 tax be withdrawn and the marriage question satisfactorily settled. The Minister answered that the tax would be removed for women but not for men, and that marriages would be recognized if they were registered. The concessions were meagre and, unsurprisingly, rejected, with Gandhi pointing out that Gokhale had been assured that the tax would be removed for men as well, and that virtually no Indian marriages were registered.27 The Bill passed through the Senate, and received Royal Assent on 14 June. Lord Gladstone complained to London of ‘the truculent and minatory attitude of the Indian community generally, and of Mr Gandhi in particular’. He was confident the resistance would dissipate, telling the Colonial Office in London that ‘attempt on the part of the Indians in this country to extort concessions by threats and charges of bad faith’ was ‘foredoomed to failure’.28 The breakdown of negotiations was reported to Gokhale by Henry Polak via a series of melancholy missives. In early June he wrote that ‘the relations between the Government and the Indian community are almost as seriously strained as ever they have been.’ In late June, after the passage of the Bill, he remarked, ‘the betrayal has been complete.’ Polak felt ‘thoroughly ashamed to have to call myself an Englishman today’. Gokhale, who was then in London, wrote to the Government of India, warning that ‘unless the compromise agreed to between the two sides is scrupulously carried out there is sure to be renewal of a bitter struggle.’ He complained that ‘the Union Government, under pressure from Boer Extremists, has again broken faith with the Indians.’ If passive resistance broke out once more, Gokhale would return to India and move a resolution supporting it in the Imperial Council.30 Also making the case for Gandhi was his old English patron Lord Ampthill. Ampthill had been briefed by Maud Polak, who prepared for his scrutiny a 78- page document listing the handicaps under which Indians in South Africa still suffered. Speaking in the House of Lords, Ampthill launched a wide-ranging attack on the new Immigration Bill. It did not maintain existing rights of entry and re-entry; it did not recognize Hindu and Muslim marriages; it did not honour  the South Africans ministers’ promise to Gokhale that they would abolish the £3 tax. Lord Ampthill recalled how, between 1907 and 1910, under the leadership of the ‘devoted patriot’ Gandhi, the Indians in South Africa ‘were obliged to resort to passive resistance and to voluntarily undergo untold sacrifices’. ‘My Lords,’ asked Ampthill of his fellow peers, ‘how are you going to meet the untold scandal which will be created if there shall be a renewal of passive resistance?’ In the third week of June 1913, Gandhi wrote to Gokhale that ‘the Bill is so bad that passive resistance is a necessity. By the time this is in your hands, some of us may already be in gaol.’ He listed the defects in the bill: namely, the persistence of the racial bar in the Orange Free State, the merely partial relief in the tax and marriage questions, the taking away of the right of Indians in other provinces to enter the Cape. He thought passive resistance might begin as early as July, with educated and uneducated Indians alike entering provinces and refusing to show any papers. ‘So far as I can judge at present,’ he wrote, ‘100 men and 13 women will start the struggle. As time goes, we may have more.’ Food and clothing would be collected by begging. ‘If we all go to gaol, Kallenbach has undertaken to do the begging himself. He can be thoroughly relied upon to see that no family is starved so long as he has life in him.’ He added: ‘Some of my private burdens are being found by Dr. Mehta.’ Gandhi expected the ‘struggle … to last a year but if we have more men than I anticipate, it may close during the next session of the Union Parliament. We are making provisions for an indefinite prolongation.’ The imminent revival of passive resistance worried Gokhale’s close friend William Wedderburn. A former member of the Indian Civil Service, Wedderburn had played a key role in starting the Indian National Congress. After serving two terms as Congress president, he had returned to England, where he became a Liberal Member of Parliament. Gokhale spent much time with Wedderburn on his visits to England, discussing imperial policies and India. When Gokhale arrived in London in May 1913, he was suffering from diabetes and its complications. His ears were painful and he could not sleep. The doctors had advised three months’ rest. Wedderburn wrote to Gandhi that ‘unfortunately the sad crisis in S. Africa … has got upon his nerves.’ Gokhale now planned to  return to India in August, place the South African question before the Imperial Council, and raise money for the cause, but his friends felt that his health would not stand the strain of the sea journey – the Red Sea would be boiling in August – or the burden of organizing a campaign in India in the heat and humidity of September and October. Given the ‘vital importance to India of [Gokhale’s] life and health’, Gandhi was asked to request him to delay his journey. And perhaps the struggle itself could be postponed. ‘My (private) suggestion,’ wrote Wedderburn to Gandhi, is that if passive resistance is resolved on, it should not commence before the end of the year, the interval being employed in negotiations, with an ultimatum that it will begin on the 1st of January. Passive resistance, including women and children, is a serious matter, and should not be undertaken hastily, nor until all means of compromise have been tried.33 Gandhi was sensible of the importance of Gokhale’s health. He recognized the enormous suffering that a fresh bout of satyagraha would entail. And so he explored the last remaining avenues for a settlement. Having failed with the new Interior Minister, he tried his luck with General Smuts. Smuts was now Defence Minister, but had a long connection with Indian affairs, and with Gandhi himself. In the last week of June, Gandhi went down from Natal to Transvaal and sought an interview with the General. The changes that would satisfy them, he said, would be those permitting Indians born in South Africa to enter the Cape as before; allowing ex-indentures who had lived three years in Natal as free men to re-enter the province even if they had gone back to India; legalizing all monogamous Indian marriages celebrated within the Union; and allowing in one wife of an Indian ‘so long as she is the only one in South Africa, irrespective of the number of wives he might have in India’. He was waiting for the summons in Kallenbach’s home in Johannesburg. ‘If you require me at the telephone,’ Gandhi told the Minister, ‘you have only to ring up 1635, and I shall be at the telephone from wherever I may be.’ At the same time, Gandhi deputed Polak to London for a last-ditch effort to lobby the Imperial Government. Gokhale was already in the United Kingdom. They both – the one courteously, the other insistently – wrote to and met various officials of the Colonial and India Offices.35 The South African Interior Minister, Abraham Fischer, was in London too, and met Gokhale. He said ‘further legislation was out of the question’; however, he was prepared to see that the law  would not be implemented harshly. Gokhale pointed out that ‘Indian sentiment attached great importance’ to the marriage question. The Minister answered that ‘South Africa could not alter her marriage law’; Indians would have to register their marriages if they wished them to be legal. While in London, Henry Polak gave an interview to the Jewish Chronicle, in which he said Indians in South Africa had been ‘fighting the Jewish fight’. For ‘not a single argument that was advanced against Indians but had already been urged against Jews in one or other European country’. They were accused of unfair competition, of being an insanitary nuisance, of being strange, different, an inferior race. Out of an ‘unworthy fear’ of being classed with dark-skinned Indians, many Jews in South Africa had taken the British side. But some would not – Polak here singled out Ritch, Kallenbach, and the Cape politician Morris Alexander. Honourable Jews everywhere had to stand with Gandhi and company, insisted Polak, for ‘the Indian problem in South Africa is, at bottom, neither political nor economic. It is ethical, and I feel justified in asking for the hearty co-operation of our coreligionists in endeavouring to seek an ethical solution of it.’ In early July, there was a major strike in the mines around Johannesburg, provoked by managers extracting extra work for the same pay. Militants went from mine to mine, asking men to stop work. Some 20,000 white workers laid down tools, and when the owners called in the police, turned violent. They burnt the offices of the Star newspaper, looted shops, and attacked railway stations, pulling staff off trains. They then marched on the Rand Club, the watering-hole of the mine managers and owners. They were met by armed police; in the ensuing battle, a dozen miners died. They were buried the next day after a funeral procession in which more than 30,000 people participated. On the day of the Rand Club affray, Gandhi and Kallenbach were in downtown Johannesburg. The Indian wanted to help nurse the wounded, but his friend said they’d better stay out of the trouble. They then walked the five miles to Kallenbach’s home in Mountain View. On the way, Gandhi ‘proposed that we should in the face of so much suffering, which we had just witnessed, have only one meal [a day]’. Kallenbach dissuaded him, saying that they should stick to the  diet that was the norm at Phoenix. That was austere enough: two scant meals with no rice, no bread, no salt, no spices and no sweets. As Defence Minister, General Smuts was in the thick of the battle between the Government and the miners. Gandhi recognized this, but still pressed his case for an appointment. ‘It is cruel to worry General Smuts whilst his attention is engrossed in the all-important strike matter,’ he wrote to the Minister’s secretary on 11 July. ‘But politics are a cruel game, and I am afraid I must be a party to it so long as I must to obtain all I want through that channel, rather than Passive Resistance.’ He still hoped for a compromise which would satisfy the concerns of the Government as well as the honour and prestige of the Indians. Smuts’ secretary wired back to say that owing to the crisis caused by the miners’ strike he had no time to go into the settlement proposed by Gandhi. As it turned out, Gandhi’s own attentions now emphatically turned from the political to the personal. On 12 July – the day after he wrote to Smuts – a letter arrived from Phoenix which has not survived, but whose explosive contents are hinted at in Kallenbach’s diary: Rose at 6.45 a.m. Got letter from Manilal with enclosed for Mr G[andhi] in which he makes serious confession. Mr G. came to my office and [I] broke the news to him and gave him the letter. He felt it most keenly. We both wired to Manilal. I decided to accompany Mr Gandhi to Phoenix.41 Manilal’s ‘confession’ was with regard to his affair with a girl at Phoenix. But this was no ordinary girl; she was Jeki, daughter of Pranjivan Mehta. In any event, his son’s violation of brahmacharya before marriage would have angered Gandhi; that he had done so with the married daughter of his closest friend and oldest patron made the transgression even harder to forgive. The only traces of this incident in Gandhi’s Collected Works are a brief reference in the Autobiography to ‘the moral fall of two of the inmates of the ashram’. The fallen folk are not named, nor is their sin specified.42 The details of the incident have however been painstakingly pieced together by Manilal’s biographer, Uma Meshtrie.There is also an account in the memoir of Millie Polak, who was a witness, if not to the actual event, to its painful aftermath. Millie does not refer to the couple by name: Jeki is called ‘Lila’ and Manilal referred to, equally misleadingly, as ‘N.’, and without his relationship to Gandhi being mentioned. Since Jeki was both married and older than Manilal, Millie thought it was ‘a case of deliberate seduction on her part’.44  This may have been unfair. Phoenix was unusual in that it brought under one roof boys and girls who were not related together. This would not have happened in an Indian home in Gujarat (or Durban, or Johannesburg). Although Gandhi does not seem to have realized it, the risk of sexual attraction was inherent in this experiment in communal living. Manilal had seen, at first hand, the loving and even passionate relationship between his brother Harilal and his wife Chanchal. At the age of twenty it was entirely natural that he would be open to such a relationship himself. At Phoenix, he and Jeki were thrown together in the house, in the fields, in the school, on trips to the city. On Jeki’s side, she had stayed on at Phoenix to be mentored by her father’s friend. Living apart from her husband Manilal Doctor (who was now back in Mauritius), she probably welcomed the attentions and company of Gandhi’s son Manilal. That they developed a mutual attraction does not, in retrospect, appear to be so surprising or shocking. In fact, from an essay written by Manilal forty years later – by which time he was a father of grown-up children himself – it appears that Gandhi had for some time harboured suspicions about his son’s feelings for Jeki. In this recollection, Manilal wrote cryptically that I must confess to my utter shame that I was the cause of father having to undergo a fast for seven days in 1912 [sic]. I had tried to deceive him. He wanted an admission from me but I persisted in denying until at last I received a letter from him which was signed ‘Blessings from your father in Agony’. I could no longer bear it. I wanted to confess but I had not the courage to approach him direct. I, therefore, enclosed the letter in a letter to Mr Kallenbach who was to us like a member of a family. I asked father to forgive me in the letter. I received a telegram from him: ‘I forgive you. Ask God to forgive you.’45 On receving Manilal’s letter (via Kallenbach) Gandhi rushed back to Phoenix. He spoke to the boys in the settlement, who – to shield their comrades – told first one story, then another. After evening prayers, Gandhi told the gathering that he was upset with them for ‘keeping the truth from me’. From Manilal, Gandhi ‘extracted a solemn vow that he should not marry for some years and that he would live a strictly celibate life, until such time as he, Mr Gandhi, should release him from his vow’. Jeki, apparently of her own volition, chose to repent by cutting her beautiful long hair, dressing in white (traditionally widow’s garb), and taking to a saltless diet.  For several years now, Gandhi had sensed that his eldest son, Harilal, was taking a path somewhat different to that marked out for him by his father.  Disenchanted with one son, Gandhi had pinned his hopes on the others. He had great expectations of Manilal especially, training him to be a brahmachari, to work with his hands, to turn his back on the rewards and comforts of a conventional career. His exhortations had had, it now appeared, limited effect. Although Manilal worked hard on the farm and at the press, although he had come forward to court arrest, he had failed the true and ultimate test by succumbing to ‘basal’ passions and having an affair with Jeki. Manilal’s transgression was in some ways even harder to take than his brother’s rebellion. Gandhi’s response was to fast for a whole week; after it ended, he would have only one meal a day for a year. That latter vow he had wanted to take after witnessing the violence against the miners; dissuaded by Kallenbach, he now took it as a mark of his pain at being let down by his son and his ward, and also as atonement for what he felt was his inadequate and incomplete supervision.  Against this backdrop of political turmoil and personal strife, the series on health published by Gandhi in Indian Opinion continued serenely on. Later parts dealt with water treatments and earth cures, with fruits that could cure constipation and with ‘the husband’s duty not to agitate the wife by starting quarrels with her’ during pregnancy. The thirty-fourth instalment carried the definitive title, ‘Conclusion’. Gandhi once more clarified that he was not a trained doctor; yet, he thought, he had written this guide ‘from a worthy motive. The intention is not to recommend what medicines to take after the onset of a disease. The more immediate purpose, rather, has been to show how sickness may be averted.’ Even as he wrote this, Gandhi was augmenting his already considerable experience of nature cures and naturopathy. Living at Phoenix was a young Gujarati who suffered from acute rheumatism, to control which he took ‘large doses of oral medication’. Gandhi took him off the tablets and put him on a diet of fruit and tomatoes. The patient was given a series of steam-baths, one every other day. He sat, covered with blankets, on a chair beneath which was a pot of boiling water. When the water had boiled over, his sweating body was wiped clean. After several weeks of this treatment, recalled Gandhi’s young patient, ‘the pain got reduced but became mobile and began circulating in my system – one day in the knees, the other day in the wrists, and the next day either the back  or the finger joints would be stiff.’ With the pain having ‘lessened comparatively’, he could now participate in the activities of the ashram. The last two instalments of the series on health had appeared in the same issue of Indian Opinion: that dated 16 August 1913. Gandhi wrote that if he got time later, he would tell readers of the ‘qualities and uses of a number of simple materials’.49 For now, the author, and his periodical, would have to focus on other, though not necessarily more important questions. A fresh satyagraha loomed, and the leader had to prepare for it. Among the letters of solidarity received by Gandhi at this time, the most curious (and perhaps also the most charming) came from John Cordes, his somewhat errant disciple who was still in thrall to Theosophy. Cordes had recently been in India, where he met both Annie Besant and the boy she had chosen as the Representative of God on Earth, Jiddu Krishnamurti. ‘I have not met your equal regarding outward virtues,’ wrote Cordes to Gandhi. ‘You are a mystic. But in neatness J. Krishnamurti surpasses you.’From India, Cordes proceeded to Vienna, to see his mother. He now hoped Gandhi would ‘find money to carry on [your] next campaign’. The Theosophist had been ‘mentally arguing with friend Smuts imagining myself in possession of £100,000 which I tendered him as bribe to try to be honest for once but he said it was foreign to his nature and quite impossible, so I handed this fund to you for P[assive] R[esistance].’ In the middle of August, the Baptist minister Joseph Doke died. Gandhi wrote tributes to him in both English and Gujarati, and also travelled to Johannesburg to speak at a memorial service. The minister was ‘a great and altruistic man’ with no trace of class or colour prejudice, in whose house ‘every Indian, whether rich or poor, was given the same consideration’. Gandhi remembered Doke’s efforts to convert him to his faith. The Indian had answered that the ‘fullness of Christianity could only be found in its interpretation of the light and by the aid of Hinduism. But Mr Doke was not satisfied. He missed no occasion to bring home to him (the speaker) the truth as he (Mr Doke) knew it and which brought him and his so much inward peace.’ The memorial service for Joseph Doke was held in Johannesburg’s Baptist Church on 24 August. Two weeks later, Gandhi informed the Government that due to the continuance of the £3 tax, the racial bar in the Immigration Law, and  the uncertain status of their married women, the Indians had ‘most reluctantly and with the utmost regret decided to revive passive resistance’.They had waited long enough in any case.            