 16 The Contest of Civilizations   On 13 November, 1909, Mohandas Gandhi and Hajee Habib boarded the SS Kildonan Castle, bound for Cape Town. For the next week Gandhi scarcely saw his companion at all. This was by choice, for he was occupied with writing a text whose contours had become clear in his mind those months in London. He wrote it in Gujarati, by hand, and at such a fast clip that he completed a draft in nine days. He was tired – turning now to his left hand to write letters – but satisfied. In 275 pages of manuscript, only a dozen lines seem to have been scratched out and rewritten. The Gujarati edition of the book was published in January 1910, with the title, Hind Swaraj. The English version, dictated by Gandhi to Hermann Kallenbach, was called Indian Home Rule, and appeared two months later. (Both were printed on the press at Phoenix that also brought out Indian Opinion.) In either language it carries, a hundred years later, a singular status as the first book Gandhi published, and as the only extended, if not wholly considered, statement of his political and moral philosophy. Although many thematic collections of his writings appeared in his lifetime, Gandhi published only three books qua books. Since the other two were works of autobiography, Hind Swaraj carries even more weight as representing, so to speak, his most important political testament. Hind Swaraj was profoundly shaped by Gandhi’s recent stay in the United Kingdom. What he heard, saw and said in those four months fed directly and immediately into the writing of the book. There were, in particular, two provocations. The first was the murder of Curzon Wyllie and the flurry of excitement it provoked. Dhingra’s act, and its endorsement by young Indians such as Savarkar, alerted Gandhi to the appeal of violence among the young. To combat this, he needed to state – or restate – the case for non-violence. The second provocation was more curious. In the third week of September 1909, the Illustrated London News published a withering attack on the idea of  Indian nationalism. Its author was G. K. Chesterton, who was then writing a weekly column for the magazine. Chesterton was not especially known for his interest in Britain’s colonies; indeed, this may have been his only essay on the subject. Chesterton had been reading Indian Sociologist, the journal published by Shyamaji Krishnavarma, and keenly followed by Indian students in England and the Continent. He thought their ideas unoriginal; as he wrote, ‘the principal weakness of Indian Nationalism seems to be that it is not very Indian and not very national’. There was a world of difference between ‘a conquered people demanding its own institutions and the same people demanding the institutions of a conqueror’. The Indian nationalists Chesterton was reading (and meeting) simply say with ever-increasing excitability, ‘Give me a ballot-box. Provide me with a Ministerial dispatch-box. Hand me over the Lord Chancellor’s wig. I have a natural right to be Prime Minister. I have a heaven-born claim to introduce a Budget. My soul is starved if I am excluded from the Editorship of the Daily Mail’, or words to that effect. If, on the other hand, one of these men had demanded a return to a pre-British past, on the grounds that ‘every system has its sins, and we prefer our own’, Chesterton would have considered ‘him an Indian Nationalist, or, at least, an authentic Indian’. This kind of Indian would have chosen Maharajas over civil servants, on the grounds that ‘I prefer one king whom I hardly ever see to a hundred kings regulating my diet and my children.’ Admitting the existence of sectarian differences in India, he would nonetheless have insisted that ‘religion is more important than peace’. ‘If you do not like our sort of spiritual comfort,’ this authentic Nationalist would have told the alien ruler, ‘we never asked you to. Go and leave us with it.’ Gandhi read Chesterton’s article, and its message resonated with him. He sent a piece to Indian Opinion which contained long excerpts from this article written by one ‘read by millions with great avidity’. He thought Indians must reflect over these views of Mr Chesterton and consider what they should rightly demand. May it not be that we seek to advance our own interests in the name of the Indian people? Or, that we have been endeavouring to destroy what the Indian people have carefully nurtured through thousands of years?4 The views of Dhingra and Savarkar, and the gloss on them by Chesterton, persuaded Gandhi that he needed to write a manifesto for the freedom of India  that was not derivative; that was based on the traditions of the subcontinent rather than on received models of European nationalism.  In late September 1909, when Chesterton’s article appeared, it was clear that the Indian deputation to London would return empty-handed. Gandhi was now free to make public statements about their mission – and about other matters. Two speeches he made form an important part of the background to the writing of Hind Swaraj. On 5 October, some expatriates in London held a meeting in support of the third Gujarati Literary Conference, being held in Rajkot. They asked Gandhi to speak. He urged his audience to cultivate pride in their mother tongue, noting that ‘one strong reason why the Boers enjoy swarajya [freedom] today is that they and their children mostly use their own language.’ As ‘the basis of my pride as an Indian’, he said, I must have pride in myself as a Gujarati. Otherwise we will be left without any moorings … If only we make on Indian languages half the effort that we waste on English, thanks to certain notions of ours, the situation will change altogether … It is, therefore, a very good sign that Gujarati, Bengali, Urdu and Marathi conferences are beginning to be held.5 A week later, Gandhi spoke to the Hampstead Peace and Arbitration Society. The writer C. E. Maurice (a heterodox Christian) was in the chair. Rejecting Kipling’s claim that East and West could never meet, Gandhi observed that there had been individual instances of English and Indian people living together under the same rule without a jarring note, and what was true of individuals could be made true of nations … [At the same time] to a certain extent it was true that there was no meeting place between civilisations … It seemed to him that the chief characteristic of modern civilisation [was that it] worshipped the body more than the spirit, and gave everything for the glorifying of the body. Their railways, telegraphs and telephones, did they tend to help them forward to a moral elevation? Gandhi drew for himself and his audience a contrast between the holy Hindu city ‘Benares of old, before there was a mad rush of civilization’ and the Banaras of today, which was an ‘unholy city’. ‘Unless this mad rush was changed, a calamity must come. One way would be for them to adopt modern civilization; but far be it for him to say that they should ever do so. India would then be the football of the world, and the two nations [India and Britain] would be flying at each other.’ The day after his Hampstead speech Gandhi wrote to Henry Polak about it. The talk and the discussion that followed had provoked in him a series of  reflections and conclusions. He had come round to the view that ‘there is no impassable barrier between East and West’; rather, there was one between ancient and modern civilization. Thus ‘the people of Europe, before they were touched by modern civilisation, had much in common with the people of the East.’ India was now being damaged by modern artefacts such as the railway and telephones, with cities like Bombay and Calcutta becoming the ‘real plague spots’. If ‘British rule was replaced tomorrow by Indian rule based on modern methods,’ said Gandhi to Polak, ‘India would be no better’; in fact, then ‘Indians would only become a second or fifth edition of Europe or America.’ Therefore, ‘India’s salvation consists in unlearning what she has learnt during the past fifty years.’ Among the reforms proposed by Gandhi in this letter was that Indians should stop wearing machine-made clothing, whether manufactured in factories owned by Europeans or by Indians themselves. Gandhi also felt that ‘it was simply impertinence for any man or any body of men to begin or contemplate reform of the whole world.’ Rather, all of us who think likewise must take the necessary step; and the rest, if we are in the right, must follow. The theory is there: our practice will have to approach it as much as possible. Living in the midst of the rush, we may not be able to shake ourselves free from all taint. Every time I get into a railway car, or use a motor-bus, I know that I am doing violence to my sense of what is right. His time in London had convinced him that ‘I was entirely off the track when I considered that I should receive a medical training.’ He now felt that modern hospitals ‘perpetuate vice, misery and degradation’; had there been no hospitals for the cure of venereal diseases, there would be ‘less sexual vice amongst us’. So it ‘would be sinful for me in any way whatsoever to take part in the abominations that go on in the hospitals’.7 The speeches to Gujaratis and pacifists were throat-clearing exercises, hesitant, abbreviated anticipations of the full-blown polemic that was Hind Swaraj. The book was written in the demotic mode, with an abundant use of metaphors. It was constructed around an imaginary conversation between a ‘Reader’, who was almost certainly modelled on Pranjivan Mehta, and an ‘Editor’, who, of course, was Gandhi himself.The sanction for this device came from tradition, for it was widely used in classical Indian literature, above all the Bhagavad-Gita, where Krishna answers and clarifies the doubts and anxieties of Arjuna.  The twenty short chapters of Hind Swaraj dealt with such subjects as the meanings of freedom and passive resistance, and the definition of ‘true civilization’. One chapter deals with ‘the condition of England’; five chapters with the ‘condition of India’. The book begins by rehearsing the history of Indian nationalism since the founding of the Congress in 1885. Gandhi deplored the dismissal by young hotheads of Naoroji and Gokhale as lackeys of Empire. These moderates had prepared the way for what followed, and ‘it is a mark of wisdom not to kick against the very step from which we have risen higher. The removal of a step from a staircase brings down the whole of it.’ The partisanship of the radicals distressed him; it was, he remarked, ‘a bad habit to say that another man’s thoughts are bad and ours only are good, and that those holding different views from ours are the enemies of the country.’ The chapter on the condition of England is severe on British political institutions. ‘That which you consider the mother of Parliaments,’ the editor tells the reader, ‘is like a sterile woman and prostitute. The Parliament has not yet of its own accord done a single good thing, hence I have compared it to a sterile woman. The natural condition of that Parliament is such that, without outside pressure, it can do nothing. It is like a prostitute because it is under the control of ministers who change from time to time.’ Still, Gandhi did not think that the rulers were beyond redemption. The English, he said, ‘rather deserve our sympathy … They are enterprising and industrious, and their mode of thought is not inherently immoral.’ The book’s core consists of five chapters on ‘the condition of India’. These condemn railways, lawyers and doctors for spreading poverty and disease, and for intensifying social conflict. The railways, claimed Gandhi, had promoted famine (by encouraging a shift to cash crops), carried plague, and in general ‘accentuate[d] the evil nature of man’. Lawyers had stoked divisions, fomented quarrels from which they alone benefited (through client fees), and helped consolidate British rule by allowing law courts to act as arbiters of the destiny of Indians. For their part, doctors made patients dependent on pills, and encouraged them to take to alcohol and unhealthy foods. Gandhi made the case for an anterior Indian nationhood, existing from long before colonial rule. The presence of Muslim conquerors did not, he thought,  invalidate his claim. For ‘India cannot cease to be a single nation because people belonging to different religions live in it. The introduction of foreigners does not necessarily destroy the nation, they merge in it.’ Having defended the idea of India as a nation, Gandhi now exalted the Indian way of life. He insisted that ‘the civilization India has evolved is not to be beaten in the world.’ For the tendency of Indian civilization is to elevate the moral being, that of the Western civilization to propagate immorality. The latter is godless, the former is based on a belief in God. So understanding and so believing, it behooves every lover of India to cling to the old Indian civilization even as a child clings to its mother’s breast. This love of the old was coupled with a distaste for the new. ‘Machinery is the chief symbol of modern civilization,’ said Gandhi. ‘It represents a great sin.’ And, again: ‘I cannot recall a single good point in connection with machinery.’ Machines had impoverished India, by throwing craftsmen out of work and encouraging a division between capitalists and labourers. He thought ‘it would be folly to assume that an Indian Rockefeller would be better than the American Rockefeller.’ If such passages seem a direct engagement with G. K. Chesterton, other parts of the book answered other provocations – those represented, for example, by the recently executed Madan Lal Dhingra and the still active V. D. Savarkar, who believed that freedom from colonial subjection would come about only through armed struggle. To those who lived (and died) by the gun, Gandhi said the claim that ‘there is no connection between the means and the end is a great mistake’. He spoke of how the wrong means produced an escalating cycle of violence and counter-violence. He offered the example of a robber who came to one’s house. If one mobilized one’s neighbours, the robber would in turn call on his mates, and the two factions would fight and fight. If, on the other hand, one kept one’s windows open for his next visit, the robber might be confused and repent, and stop stealing altogether. Gandhi did not want to suggest that all robbers would act like this, but ‘only to show that only fair means can produce fair results, and that, at least in the majority of cases, if not, indeed, in all, the force of love and pity is infinitely greater than the force of arms’.  For Gandhi, those who wrote history were preoccupied with wars and bloodshed. Thus, if two brothers quarrelled, their neighbours and the newspapers, and hence history, would take notice of it; but if they peaceably settled their dispute, it would remain unrecorded. Extrapolating, Gandhi said, in a striking passage, that ‘hundreds of nations live in peace. History does not, and cannot, take note of this fact. History is really a record of every interruption of the even working of love or of the soul.’ Contrary to what was popularly believed, non-violence had been a far more active force in human affairs than violence. The ‘greatest and most unimpeachable evidence of the success of this force is to be found in the fact that, in spite of the wars of the world, it still lives on’. Gandhi argued that non-violent resistance required greater courage than armed struggle. ‘Who is the true warrior,’ he asked: the person ‘who keeps death always as a bosom-friend or he who controls the death of others?’ He insisted that ‘passive resistance is an all-sided sword; it can be used anyhow; it blesses him who uses it and him against whom it is used. Without shedding a drop of blood, it produces far-reaching results.’ Hind Swaraj is also notable for its advocacy of inter-faith harmony. The British claimed there existed an ‘inborn enmity between Hindus and Mahomedans’. Gandhi answered that ‘the Hindus flourished under Moslem sovereigns, and Moslems under the Hindu. Each party recognised that mutual fighting was suicidal, and that neither party would abandon its religion by force of arms. Both parties, therefore, decided to live in peace. With the English advent the quarrels recommenced.’ In Gandhi’s view, the different religions were merely ‘different roads converging to the same point. What does it matter that we take different roads, so long as we reach the same goal? Wherein is the cause of quarrelling?’ In a chapter on education, Gandhi vigorously advocated the use, within India, of languages other than English. All Indians should know their mother-tongue. Hindi could be promoted as a link language, to be read in either the Devanagari or Persian script, thus forging closer relations between Hindus and Muslims. If this were done, ‘we can drive the English language out of the field in a short time’.  The book ended with a list of nineteen prescriptions for the reader, the middle- class Indian who was Gandhi’s main audience. This, among other things, urged the value of suffering, deplored the tendency of blaming the British for everything, and asked lawyers, doctors and rich men in general to take to wearing and promoting cloth made with handlooms. At the time of the publication of Hind Swaraj, Gandhi had been seeing his work in print for two decades. However, this was his first published book, and also, more importantly, his first considered piece of writing on Indian politics and society. His earlier essays, abundant though they were, were on rather specialized, specific, themes – such as vegetarian diets, racial laws in Natal and the Transvaal, the origins and outcomes of a particular satyagraha, the pleasures and pains of a particular term in jail, the greatness and relevance of Mazzini, Lincoln, Florence Nightingale, Dadabhai Naoroji, etc. Hind Swaraj was Gandhi’s claim to a larger role for himself in the homeland to which he hoped one day to return. The book appeared at the end of a decade of intense political agitation in India. The Swadeshi movement of 1905–7 had seen the liberals in the Congress being overshadowed, and indeed overwhelmed, by the radicals. This Moderate/Extremist split was formalized in the Surat Congress of December 1907, when the fragile unity of the organization came apart amidst a barrage of shouting, sloganeering, and the throwing of shoes. The Congress had previously confined itself to issuing appeals and writing petitions. Now, bonfires of foreign cloth and fiery speeches became the order of the day. And even Swadeshi was tame in comparison with the terrorist groups that had sprung up in Bengal and Maharashtra, composed of young men seeking to assassinate British officials and thereby further the glory of the Motherland. One consequence of the Swadeshi movement was the polarization of religious sentiments. In Bengal, the movement had coalesced with a struggle to undo the partition of the province, which the British had promoted to separate the Muslim-majority districts of the east from the radicalizing influence of the intellectuals of Calcutta. But, as Gandhi’s mentor Gokhale noted, the ‘wild talk’ of the leaders of the Swadeshi movement, demanding ‘Swarajya without British control’, had set the rulers against the Hindus. They patronized a newly formed Muslim League, promising its grandees a greater share of public posts and  government appointments. Gokhale now worried about the ‘fierce antagonism between Hindus and Mahomedans’. Some Hindu organizations were ‘frankly anti-Mahomedan, as the Moslem League is frankly anti-Hindu, and both are anti-national’.12 Another consequence of the Swadeshi movement was the marginalization of the Moderates. Young patriots were fired with the dream of freedom, to be achieved not by incremental, constitutional means, but by spectacular acts of violence against prominent officials and proconsuls. These revolutionaries thought – or hoped – that by murdering policemen or setting off bombs in government buildings they would awaken the masses, catalyzing their nascent, suppressed, anti-colonial sentiments. The Moderates believed that, in their own struggle against the oppressive aspects of colonial rule, they had the British people and British institutions on their side. Harsh laws and punitive taxes were ‘un-British’, to be lifted or withdrawn when their true nature was revealed to His Majesty’s distant but not necessarily unfeeling Government. The ultimate, long-term goal was Dominion Status, where India would have its own elected legislatures on the Westminster model, with the British tie kept alive by the King acting (as he did in Australia and Canada) as head of state. The Extremists, on the other hand, rejected British rule, British institutions and British exemplars. They saw the struggle in black-and-white, akin to battles in Hindu myth between gods and demons, devas and asuras. The British were all evil. Gokhale and his ilk liked to quote Mill and Burke (approvingly). On the other side, Gokhale’s great rival, Bal Gangadhar Tilak, idolized the medieval Maratha warrior Shivaji, who had conducted a series of guerrilla battles against Muslim rulers based in Delhi. Tilak had also started an annual festival in honour of Ganapati, the god whose invocation at the start of any task (or battle) was believed to aid in its success (or victory). Across the subcontinent, in Bengal, young radicals formed secret societies where they learned to assemble bombs and use guns. They were fired by the example of the Goddess Durga, wife of Shiva, known and revered for slaying the forces of evil. Shivaji and Durga, revenge and retribution – these were the models and methods of the Extremists in the Indian national movement. This invocation of Hindu gods and warriors inevitably disenchanted Muslims, who  had recourse to their own holy texts, from which vantage point Hindus were seen as infidels and idolaters. There was a muscular, masculine edge to the patriotism of the Extremists. British rule (and Muslim rule before it) had emasculated the Hindu. He needed now to recover his vigour and his virility, to renew it through daring acts of heroism and sacrifice. Once the British had been evicted through terror, the motherland would rebuild itself along classical Hindu lines. In imagining their post-colonial future, some revolutionaries put their faith in the ancient Indian village panchayat; others, in a pan-Indian Hindu Rashtra which would unite, in one solid, strong, centralized state, Hindus currently divided by language, caste and region. The mood in India at the time Gandhi composed and wrote Hind Swaraj was captured in two books by British journalists based in the subcontinent. Both noted the intensity and vigour of the new political movements, yet they had somewhat different understandings of it. The man from the pro-Establishment Times of London saw ‘an illusory “Nationalism” which appeals to nothing in Indian history, but which is calculated and meant to appeal with dangerous force to Western sentiment and ignorance.’ While professing democratic values and aspirations, this movement, claimed the Times man, appealed on the one hand to ‘the old tyranny of caste and to the worst superstitions of Hinduism’, and on the other to ‘the murderous methods of Western Anarchism’. The man from the liberal Manchester Guardian was more sympathetic. He observed that the political upsurge was both deep and widespread. ‘It is the conviction of many,’ he remarked, that ‘India is now standing on the verge of a national renaissance – a new birth in intellect, social life, and the affairs of the state.’ This renaissance was inspired by the ‘example set to all Oriental nationalities by Japan’, but also by a keen understanding of the political heritage of the conquerors themselves. The Guardian man thus wrote that the visits of highly educated Indians to England, the use of English as a common tongue among educated people of all races and religions, the increasing knowledge of our history and our hard-won liberties, the increasing study of our great Liberal thinkers – all these admirable advantages we have ourselves contributed to the new spirit, and it is useless for startled reactionaries to think of withdrawing them now.15  Gandhi, in South Africa, was keenly following political and social developments in his homeland. The pages of Indian Opinion were peppered with reports on Congress meetings and Swadeshi protests. Gandhi himself subscribed to a variety of English and Gujarati papers, which came to him through the post. Now, in his own little book, written with speed on the ship, he brought together his views on what ailed India and what might redeem it. As revealed in Hind Swaraj, Gandhi remained in some respects close to the Moderates. He deplored the savage criticisms of Gokhale by Savarkar and company. Like his mentor, he was deeply committed to Hindu–Muslim harmony. He saw the religious divide as a product of British rule (which, for its own interests, had set one community against the other), and not as an essential or perennial part of the Indian condition. In other respects, Gandhi appears in this book to be closer to the Extremists. His harsh words on the British Parliament distanced him from Gokhale and Naoroji. His exaltation of ancient Indian moral and civic virtues, his idealization of a past where Indians lived at peace with themselves, his insistence that education should be in the mother tongue alone – these all may have been congenial to the patriot who looked to indigenous rather than Western models of progress or redemption. Finally, in Hind Swaraj Gandhi set himself apart from both Extremists and Moderates in his advocacy of non-violent resistance. He was opposed to both petitioning and to bomb-throwing. He saw the former as ineffective and the latter as immoral. The rulers would not concede ground unless pressed to do so. But murdering officials would not scare the British into leaving either. Besides, violence tended to beget violence – once aimed at the foreigner, it would in time be aimed at Indians of rival views or backgrounds. The Transvaal protests of 1907–9 had convinced Gandhi of the efficacy and moral superiority of satyagraha, a method for whose application India offered a larger and more inviting stage. Hind Swaraj was a summation of Gandhi’s political views, and a statement of his political ambition. The Indian national movement had thus far been dominated by Bengalis and Maharashtrians. Valuable supporting parts had been played by Tamils, Punjabis and Hindi-speakers. Now, through the writing and publication of this book, a Gujarati based in South Africa sought to clear a space  for himself, and to make his voice heard. His experiences in the diaspora, uniting and mobilizing Indians, gave him (he thought) a unique vantage point from which to illuminate and intervene in debates within the motherland.  Gandhi had hoped that Hind Swaraj would be read and discussed in India, its parallels and departures with prevailing political trends noted and acted upon. In February 1910, a certain Chibba Prabhu arrived in Bombay from Durban with 415 copies of the original Gujarati edition of the book. However, these were seized by Customs and a copy passed on to the Oriental Translator of the Bombay Government. The book, reported this Translator, is ‘of a decidedly objectionable nature, especially considering the present disturbed political condition in the country’. He then provided a summary of Hind Swaraj’s contents in a single extended paragraph, this constituting (so far as we know) the first written response to a text that has attracted hundreds of thousands of readers down the decades: It purports to be a dialogue between the ‘Editor’ and a ‘Reader’, in which the former inculcates his peculiar views regarding the present political condition and the possible future, of India. The ‘Reader’, representing probably the average Indian ‘passive resister’ of the Transvaal, is represented as holding frankly Extremist views, and indeed speaks quite frankly of ‘driving out’ the British from India as a principal object of political agitation in this country. The ‘Editor’ is no less anxious to see the rule in India pass from the hands of the British to those of Indians. But he holds views about the evils of armed resistance of any kind, peculiar to Tolstoy, whose follower the author Mohanchand [sic] Karamchand Gandhi, professes to be. He ascribes all the evils from which India is suffering, plague, famine, poverty, crime, etc., to the railways, education, reforms, lawyers, doctors, in fact everything introduced by Englishmen in this country. Indeed, in places the man seems to be crazy in his passionate desire to keep India and her life and ways unpolluted by the least contact with the West. The English have no place in India, says the ‘Editor’, if they want to bring their harmful civilisation with them into this country. On condition that this civilisation is kept out of India, the English may be allowed to live in the land. The ‘Reader’ is made to express revolutionary ideas and even to approve of political assassinations. ‘We will first terrorise (the British) by a few murders. Then a few of our people, who will have been trained up, will fight openly. Of course 20 or 25 lakhs of people will die in this fight. But ultimately we shall regain the country. We shall defeat the British by means of guerilla warfare’. The ‘Editor’ strongly condemns these ideas as borrowed from the West and says that bloodshed can never make India independent though by the way he calls Dhingra a true patriot, ‘but his patriotism was mad’. ‘But’, says the Reader, ‘you must admit that what little has been granted by Lord Morley is owing to these political murders’. ‘It is quite possible’, says the ‘Editor’, ‘that what Lord Morley has granted has been granted through fear. But what has been gained through fear can be retained only so long as that fear lasts.’ Therefore he advocates peaceful means, and among them ‘passive resistance’.16  Based on this report, the Bombay Government formally ‘forfeited to his Majesty’ the book, Hind Swaraj, ‘purporting to be printed at the International Press, Phoenix, Natal’. The book, said the order, contained ‘words which are likely to bring into hatred and contempt the Government established by law in British India and to excite disaffection to the said Government’. The circulation of the book was banned under the Press Act, and its import prohibited under the Sea Customs Act. The Government of India endorsed the ban, noting – on the basis of materials sent it from Bombay – that from the contents of this ‘clearly seditious’ book ‘it may be fairly concluded that Mr M. K. Gandhi is not the innocent martyr as which he poses to be’. The Oriental Translator of the Bombay Government had written what in effect was the first review of Hind Swaraj. Gandhi did not of course read the review, nor the glosses on it by other officials. All he knew was that copies of the Gujarati edition had been seized. He immediately wrote a letter of complaint, which is worth reproducing for its intrinsic value and because it escaped the attention of the editors of his Collected Works. Dated 16 April 1910, and written from Johannesburg, it was addressed to the Home Secretary of the Government of India. Enclosing the English edition of the book, then just out in Durban, Gandhi said: I do not know why the Gujarati copies have been confiscated. If the Government will kindly favour me with their views and their advice, I shall endeavour, so far as possible, to carry them out. In writing ‘Hind Swaraj’ it has not been my intention to embarrass the Government in so far as any writing of mine could do so, but entirely to assist it. This in no way means that I necessarily approve of any or all the actions of the Government or the methods on which it is based. In my humble opinion, every man has a right to hold any opinion he chooses, and to give effect to it also, so long as, in doing so, he does not use physical violence against anybody. Being connected with a newspaper which commands some influence and attention, and knowing that methods of violence among my countrymen may become popular even in South Africa, and feeling assured that the adoption of passive resistance as I have ventured to do in ‘Indian Home Rule’ was the surest preventative of physical violence, I did not hesitate to publish [the book] in Gujarati. The English edition has not been circulated by me in India except among officials and the leading newspapers. At the same time, I am aware that some buyers have sent it on their own account to India also. I need hardly say that the views expressed in ‘Indian Home Rule’ have nothing to do with the struggle that is going on in the Transvaal and in other parts of South Africa, intimately connected though I am with it; and I am not in a position to know how many of my countrymen share those views. At the same time, no matter where I am placed, I consider it my duty to popularize them to the best of my ability as being in the best interests of India and the Empire.18  Gandhi is here acting as both loyalist and rebel: suggesting that his advocacy of non-violence may come to the aid of the Raj, but reserving to himself the right to say what he wished about the Raj’s policies and actions. The letter held out an offer of compromise; that he might consider revising passages considered excessively provocative. Gandhi was extremely keen that his book (and his ideas) be discussed and debated within India, and by Indians. He was willing to make some changes to his text to make this possible. Meanwhile, the Government had commissioned its own English translation of Hind Swaraj, undertaken by the Gujarati interpreter of the Madras High Court. Comparing their version with Gandhi’s, the Home Department found them very similar – and equally dangerous. The distinction made by the author between words and deeds, and between passive resistance and armed violence, was characterized as ‘curious’ and dismissed as unsustainable. ‘Preaching and disseminating sedition’, remarked a senior official in the Home Department, was as offensive and dangerous to public order as actual physical violence.For, as the Director of the Criminal Intelligence Branch wrote on the file, ‘we must, I think, aim at destroying the open market for imported seditious publications of all kinds: we cannot afford to pick and choose very much according to the degree and quantity of the sedition.’ He continued, tellingly, ‘More real perversion of ideas in the direction of sedition is effected by moderate seditious publications than by those breathing violence and revolution in every line.’ The Government of India’s decision to ban the book was the subject of a scathing editorial in P. S. Aiyar’s African Chronicle. ‘No wonder,’ said the paper, that ‘sedition is ripening day by day, and discontent is growing abroad.’ For if the Viceroy and his colleagues were to be frightened at such a simple booklet as [Hind] Swaraj, and if they could not tolerate the expression of opinion of even men of Mr Gandhi’s stamp, we do not know what else the Indian Government would tolerate. Under the most provocating circumstances we have not seen Mr Gandhi using a single cross word to any one, and as a leader in politics, no country could find a better man than Mr Gandhi. Should his production be unfit for circulation, we believe, few men could be found in India who could give expression to the popular will in a sober and adequate language.22 The Government’s argument was here being turned on its head. Paranoid policemen claimed that allowing moderates like Gandhi to openly criticize aspects of Government policy would provide wanton encouragement to the extremists. P. S. Aiyar argued exactly the opposite: if even moderates such as  Gandhi could not be heard, then ordinary Indians would completely lose faith in the rulers, and seek redemption by the methods of the extremists.  In May 1910, some copies of the printed English edition of Hind Swaraj reached the shores of the Madras Presidency. An early reader was the Province’s Home Secretary. He concluded that while the author ‘affects to treat the English with forbearance’, the argument of the book was ‘calculated to lessen the esteem in which they have been held, and the writer’s whole ideal is by implication at any rate, inconsistent with the continuance of British rule, or indeed of any settled administration in India’. The critic highlighted four contentious claims made by the author: English politicians are dishonest and unscrupulous, and English newspapers are imbued with a partisan spirit. English administration in India rests upon the Courts, and then again upon lawyers, who are corrupt from top to bottom. The members of the English nation who have settled in India are of an inferior stamp to their countrymen at home. The continuation of the English in India depends entirely upon their adoption of Oriental languages and civilisation. If they fail to conform to this condition, India will be made too hot to hold them. The Home Secretary in Madras recommended a ban on the English edition of the book as well. The Secretary of the Judicial Department concurred. Then, against point (i) above, he quoted Adam Smith: ‘That corrupt and insidious animal called a politician.’ He also expressed his ‘regret that extracts from this work cannot be more widely known. The advice to lawyers to give up law and take to a handloom would, for instance, be worth communicating to the Legislative Council.’ The Government of India had made sure that Hind Swaraj was not circulated within the subcontinent, in either its Gujarati or English versions. There were thus no printed, public reviews of the book within Gandhi’s homeland. But it was reviewed by some newspapers in South Africa, where the book circulated freely. In the first week of May 1910, the Transvaal Leader published a critical assessment of the book by an acquaintance of Gandhi named Edward Dallow. An accountant of British stock, a Nonconformist by faith, Dallow had been sympathetic to the claims of the Indians in the Transvaal. He was a signatory to  the letter written by Europeans to The Times in January 1909. Later that same year, he wrote to the Colonial Secretary urging him to ‘receive the Indian deputation [led by Gandhi] with sympathetic regard’, and to use ‘the influence of your high office to procure for them the amelioration of the law which they demand.’ Dallow opposed laws that discriminated on the basis of colour. However, he was a defender of Empire, and in this capacity thought the banning of Hind Swaraj in India both prudent and necessary. For ‘under cover of a dissertation on modern civilisation this little booklet of 104 pages is in reality written in support of the political propaganda to free India from English rule, and as such the Indian Government were acting wisely in endeavouring to prevent its circulation in India.’ Gandhi might have kept his argument impersonal, distinguishing between modern civilization (which he abominated) and the English people (whom he tolerated). Nonetheless, the fact that all his illustrations of the degrading effects of modern civilisation are taken from English government, from English life, from English Ministers, Parliament and people, makes it highly improbable that any but a cultivated man and a scholar will keep the subtle distinction in mind. To the ordinary reader … the effect will be to raise a hatred not only of modern civilisation, but of the English people in India as its particular exponents. Dallow chastised Gandhi for his narrow range of reading. The lawyer had consulted the works of novelists and critics, and exalted the ‘masters of Indian philosophy’. At the same time, he had overlooked ‘masters of modern philosophy’ such as Mill, Spencer, Goethe, Kant, Hegel and de Tocqueville. Dallow ended the review with his own vision of the past and possible future of the author’s homeland: India is not so immovable as Mr Gandhi would have us believe; the caste system, which is the basis – the evil basis – of her civilisation is showing signs of weakening under the influence of modern thought and experience acquired by Indians visiting other lands. The discoveries of modern science, which show the plant to be as truly alive as the animal, have undermined one of the chief dogmas of their religion. Under the guidance of English rule, India is gradually adopting representative institutions, and her rulers look forward to the time, as yet still far distant, when India will take upon her own shoulders the burden of government as an independent and loyal appanage of the Imperial Crown.25 The review stung Gandhi, who immediately sent a reply. He began by saying that he too was a ‘lover of the Empire to which Mr Dallow and I belong’. This love, he clarified,  proceeds from my faith in the individuals who compose it, whether they be European, Kaffir, or Indian, but I decline to bow in idolatrous homage to the term. To me it simply means this: Whether the English and the Indians intend it or not, they have been thrown together by the Divine will for their mutual good; but, as free agents, they may turn the connection to evil. This latter activity of ours I call Satanic. In common with many Englishmen, after eighteen years’ close observation and, shall I say, practical life, I have come to believe that for the English people to Anglicise India, even if they could do so, would be a tragedy. Dallow had condemned the caste system; in Gandhi’s view, however, it had ‘saved India from the ruinous and brutal effect of the competitive system which has been exalted to the dignity of a science by modern civilisation’. To the charge that he was poorly read in modern philosophy, Gandhi answered that he was acquainted with the works of Mill and Spencer, but saw no reason to read more glosses of modern civilization when he saw the thing itself unfold before his eyes. ‘Must I read a critique of “Hamlet”,’ he said with some asperity, ‘when I have only to pay a shilling and see the play?’ Gandhi said that his tract was aimed at two different audiences: the party of violence within India, to whom he said that ‘whatever evils India is suffering from are mainly to our own defects and to our having worshipped the golden calf’; and to the English, to whom his appeal was ‘not necessarily to discard modern civilisation themselves, but to help India to retain her own civilisation’. On both parties he pressed the immorality of violence. To the British he said that ‘methods of repression … are absolutely useless’. To the revolutionaries he said that ‘violence cannot be rooted out of India or anywhere else by violence’. It was thus that he had ‘commended in all humility passive resistance, that is, soul force, both to the Governors and to the Governed. It is not necessary that both the sides should take it up. Either may adopt it to the advantage of both.’ Meanwhile, Gandhi was carrying on a private, if equally instructive, debate with his friend W. J. Wybergh. As Transvaal’s Commissioner of Mines in the early 1900s, and later as a Member of the Legislative Assembly, Wybergh had vigorously promoted the segregation of Asians.But he made an exception for Gandhi, the English-educated lawyer. The two met regularly at meetings of Johannesburg’s Theosophical Society. Sent Hind Swaraj by Gandhi, Wybergh commented that he did not think that ‘on the whole your argument is coherent or that the various statements and opinions you express have any real dependence upon one another’. He was not surprised that the pamphlet was seen as disloyal, since (and he seems to have been reading Dallow here)  the average plain ignorant man without intellectual subtlety would suppose that you were preaching against British rule in India. On the far more important general principle underlying your book, I must say definitely that I think you are going wrong. European civilisation has many defects and I agree with many of your criticisms, but I do not believe that it is ‘the Kingdom of Satan’ or that it should be abolished. It appears to me a necessary step in the evolution of mankind, especially manifested in and suitable for Western nations. While I recognise that the highest ideals of India (and Europe too) are in advance of this civilisation, yet I think also, with all modesty, that the bulk of the Indian population require to be roused by the lash of competition and the other material and sensuous as well as intellectual stimuli which ‘civilisation’ supplies. Wybergh conceded that not all forms of Western civilisation are suitable for India, and I don’t doubt that we British have erred (in all good faith) in trying to introduce British institutions indiscriminately. But Western ideals are necessary to India, not to supersede but to modify and develop her own. India ought, I think, to be governed on Indian lines, (whether by Indians or Englishmen is another question) but ‘civilisation’ is both necessary and useful, if it grows naturally and is not forced and it cannot be avoided. The critic turned next to the question of passive resistance. One might have no objection to its adoption by an individual saint, but as a practical political principle suitable for adoption by ordinary men living the ordinary life of citizens, it seems to be altogether pernicious, and utterly disastrous to the public welfare. It is mere anarchy, and I have always regarded Tolstoy, its principal apostle, as very likely a saint personally, but when he preaches his doctrines as political propaganda and recommends them for indiscriminate adoption, as the most dangerous enemy of humanity. I have no manner of doubt that Governments and laws and police and physical force are absolutely essential to average humanity, and are as truly ‘natural’ in their stage of development and as truly moral as eating and drinking and propagating the species … When all humanity has reached sainthood Governments will become unnecessary but not until then. Meanwhile civilisation must be mended, not ended. Gandhi, characteristically, printed Wybergh’s critical assessment in full in Indian Opinion and then sought courteously to answer it. He was, he said, ‘painfully conscious of the imperfections and defects’ in presentation that Wybergh pointed to. These might make a superficial reader conclude that the book was ‘a disloyal production’. However, he had ‘the position of a publicist practically forced upon me by circumstances’. Both the tone and content of the pamphlet had their genesis in the fact that it was written with a view to drawing Indians away from ‘the insane violence that is now going on in India.’ As for modern civilization, Gandhi argued those who were outside its ambit and have a well-tried civilisation to guide them, should be helped to remain where they are, if only as a measure of prudence … I cannot help most strongly contesting the idea that the Indian population  requires to be roused by ‘the lash of competition and the other material and sensuous as well as intellectual stimuli’; I cannot admit that these will add a single inch to its moral stature. Finally, he said that his own reading of Tolstoy’s works has never led me to consider that, in spite of his merciless analysis of institutions organised and based upon force, that is governments, he in any way anticipates or contemplates that the whole world will be able to live in a state of philosophical anarchy. What he has preached, as, in my opinion, have all world-teachers, is that every man has to obey the voice of his own conscience, and be his own master, and seek the Kingdom of God from within. For him there is no government that can control him without his sanction.28 Some of Gandhi’s British friends had profound reservations about Hind Swaraj. There are hints that even some Indians in South Africa did not entirely identify with the book’s contents. Maganlal Gandhi wrote his uncle a letter asking why he had so sharply attacked railways, doctors, and elected Parliaments. Meanwhile, Gandhi wrote to Gokhale (who would certainly have taken even stronger exception to the dismissal of modern professions and modern institutions) clarifying that the book represented his personal views. He hoped his mentor would ‘be able, should any prejudice arise against me personally or the pamphlet, to keep the merits of the struggle [in the Transvaal] entirely separate from me.’ There were, of course, responses to Hind Swaraj that required no answer at all. One such came from Isabella Fyvie Mayo, a Scottish writer and disciple of Tolstoy who worked (in her own words) for ‘the brotherhood of all races of men, the cause of international peace, and the recognition of the rights of animals’.30 In a letter to Hermann Kallenbach, Miss Mayo said she was ‘lost in admiration of Mr Gandhi’s “Home Rule for India”’. When she heard it had been banned in India, her first reaction was that the Bible itself might be proscribed, since ‘Mr Gandhi only makes practical application of the precepts of the “Sermon on the Mount”.’ The central thesis of the book Miss Mayo unreservedly endorsed. For as long as Indians delight in being Britonised, so long as ‘Swadeshi’ means only more ‘factories’, so long as Indian ambitions point to entering Government service, so long will India be enslaved. Her freedom is absolutely in her own hands, and the proscription of Mr Gandhi’s book shows that the authorities know this – for not only does he oppose all revolutionary violence and bloodshed but he would give an entirely new, irresistible and peacable character to all progressive movements everywhere.31  Reading Hind Swaraj today, one finds some portions of the book enormously appealing, other parts disconcerting and even bizarre. The polemic is powerful, but also crude. The linguistic infelicities may be because it was both written and translated in a hurry. The English version was, as noted, dictated to Hermann Kallenbach. Gandhi sent a typescript to the Baptist pastor Joseph Doke, with the request that he ‘correct and criticize’ it. ‘Some of the similes,’ said Gandhi, ‘read very crude in English.’ He was ‘painfully aware of the fact’ that the book ‘was not a “finished product”. I have simply jotted down my thoughts as they have come to me.’ The minister, taking this judgement at face value, sent what seems to have been a long list of criticisms. But Gandhi was keen to see the book in print at once, and chose not to rewrite it on the lines suggested by Doke. One striking feature of the book is its extraordinarily positive portrait of ancient Indian culture and civilization. This was perhaps not unrelated to the fact that Gandhi had lived for so many years out of India. For diasporic nationalism tends to be uncritical, eulogizing the faraway homeland, its hallowed and mostly unsullied past, and its pristine and ageless culture. The celebration of Indian civilization went hand-in-hand with a thoroughgoing condemnation of Western civilization. Ironically, this was based mostly on Western authorities. The Appendix lists twenty books or pamphlets consulted by Gandhi in writing the book, of which as many as six are by the Russian, Leo Tolstoy. Other works are by the Italian, Mazzini; the American, Thoreau; and the Englishmen, Carpenter, Ruskin and Maine. Only two of the twenty books are by Gandhi’s fellow countrymen, these being Dadabhai Naoroji’s and Romesh Chunder Dutt’s studies of the economic exploitation of the subcontinent under British rule. Gandhi wrote Hind Swaraj in 1909, at a time he scarcely knew India at all. By 1888, when he departed for London at the age of nineteen, he had lived only in towns in his native Kathiawar. There is no evidence that he had travelled in the countryside, and he knew no other part of India. Later, in 1892 and again in 1902, he came to spend several months in the city of Bombay. In 1896 he visited Calcutta and Madras to lobby for the rights of Indians in South Africa. However, at the time of the writing of Hind Swaraj, Gandhi may never have spoken to a single Indian peasant or worker (or landlord or moneylender) living or working  in India itself. Hence, perhaps, the romantic (and to a modern eye hopelessly unreal) representation of indigenous Indian culture in the book. It may be worth pointing out that while Hind Swaraj was the first book that Gandhi published, it was not the first book he had written. This was his ‘Guide to London’, drafted during those solitary evenings in Pretoria during his first year in South Africa, when he hoped still to make a career as an Anglicized barrister in Bombay. This first, unpublished, book was a paean to English education and English manners, written, appropriately, in English. The book that Gandhi wrote some sixteen years later was conceived and penned in his native Gujarati, in which language he vigorously upheld the virtues of his own civilization while diminishing that of the conqueror.            