 10 A Lobbyist in London   On 2 October 1906, Mohandas Gandhi entered his thirty-eighth year. He spent his birthday in a train travelling across the veld, from Johannesburg to Cape Town. On the evening of the 3rd, he boarded the SS Armsdale for the voyage to the United Kingdom. Gandhi’s companion aboard train and ship, Haji Ojer Ally, was a Gujarati born in 1853 in Mauritius. He studied and worked on that island before migrating to South Africa, where he ran a water bottling plant in Cape Town, later shifting base to Johannesburg. Here he branched out from business into community work, opening a ‘Hamidia Islamic Society’ whose special focus was the education of Muslim youth. He was married to a Malay lady, with whom he had eleven children. In Cape Town, under the more liberal franchise of that province, H. O. Ally had been both a municipal and parliamentary voter. (Gandhi, arriving in Natal after the reforms leading to Responsible Government, was neither.) ‘Though not a finished speaker or an accomplished scholar,’ wrote Henry Polak, ‘[Ally] had a very good command of the English language, as well as of Urdu, a powerful voice, and was possessed of a considerable degree of rough eloquence.’ He was also partial to the dramatic gesture – while speaking on the jail-going resolution of 11 September, he did so with a Union Jack draped around his shoulders. In all respects Gandhi and Ally were a study in contrast. The Hindu was dressed in sober Western clothes, while the Muslim wore flowing Oriental robes and a colourful turban. Gandhi was thin and small-made, Ally tall and grossly overweight. Unlike the lawyer, the merchant was not believed to have taken a vow of celibacy. These differences emerge quite starkly in Gandhi’s account of their voyage together. On board, Ally ate fish for lunch, and fish and sometimes meat for dinner. He also drank tea and ginger ale, and smoked continuously. Gandhi, on  the other hand, fed himself on milk, bread, potatoes, stewed fruit and fresh air. The Muslim merchant was reading Amir Ali’s Spirit of Islam and Washington Irving’s Mahomet and his Successors. The Hindu lawyer was brushing up on his Tamil, reading a history of Gujarat and a report on ‘alien immigration’, and composing his dispatches for Indian Opinion. The SS Armsdale docked at Southampton on 20 October. The same day, Gandhi gave two interviews to the press. Speaking to the London correspondent of an Indian newspaper, he said the act proposed by the Transvaal Government was ‘much more rigorous and severe’ than earlier legislation. Speaking to a British journalist, Gandhi said restrictions on Indian immigration into the Transvaal must be ‘on such terms as are not humiliating, and do not interfere with the liberty of those already settled in the country.’ ‘Mr Gandhi states that the Indians are greatly stirred over the matter,’ noted the reporter, ‘and are prepared to go to gaol rather than submit.’ The day after Gandhi landed, he visited the family of his friend Henry Polak. They lived on Grosvenor Road, in Canonbury, North London. ‘Nothing surprised me, as you had prepared me for everything,’ wrote Mohandas to Henry, adding. ‘Otherwise to meet your sisters and your brilliant father would have been a most agreeable surprise. Both the sisters are really most lovable, and if I was unmarried, or young, or believed in mixed marriage, you know what I would have done!’ The same day, Gandhi wrote to his nephew Chhaganlal making a more neutral case for interracial living. Albert West’s sister had chosen to join him in South Africa. Gandhi thought this ‘a wise step’. ‘We do want some English ladies there [at Phoenix],’ he told his nephew. ‘Do please make the best use possible of her. Let your wife and other ladies mix freely with her, and let her feel that there is no distance between her and us, and make her as comfortable as possible … Each party has very strong points for the other to imbibe.’ While Miss West prepared for an austere life among abstemious Indians, Gandhi himself was billeted at the Cecil, one of London’s most luxurious hotels. For a visiting delegation, the hotel afforded respectability and a London address that was credible as well as convenient, within walking distance of Whitehall and Charing Cross railway station.Gandhi’s first few days in London were spent writing letters on the Cecil’s notepaper, addressed to Members of  Parliament and newspaper editors whom he hoped to win over to the Indian case. The letters were typed by a Miss Lawson, who had been sent by Polak’s father to act as Gandhi’s assistant. They referred to H. O. Ally and himself rather grandly in the third person, as in ‘I shall be obliged if you would kindly grant the Deputation an interview …’ Meanwhile, unknown to Gandhi – and Ally – their claims to represent the Transvaal Indians were being challenged. ‘It appears that there are two sections among the British Indians in the Transvaal,’ wrote the Colony’s Governor to the Secretary of State. One group was represented by Gandhi and Ally, while the other ‘denies that these two gentlemen have any mandate to represent them.’ The Governor himself was ‘unable to determine [the] relative strength of the two sections.’ The opposition to the deputation was led by a man named C. M. Pillay, a Tamil who had lived in Johannesburg from before the Anglo-Boer War. In November 1902 – when Gandhi was still in India – Pillay helped draft a petition which daringly asked that the Indians in the Transvaal be allowed to come and go freely; that they may trade, buy and sell unhindered and unmolested; that they may acquire, own, and dispose of landed property, without limit, clog, or undue obstacle; that they may, by inter-position of their rulers, be preserved from any differentiation in laws, or restriction of person in government, or in treatment; that they may in no way be curtailed of their liberty or freedom … The petition went on to demand Indian representation in legislatures and municipal boards. It was signed by twenty-two people, a majority of whom were Tamils.8 Two months after this, Gandhi had arrived back in South Africa. Now based in Johannesburg, he quickly became the main channel through which Indian demands were articulated. This irritated C. M. Pillay, who saw the lawyer’s rise as a consequence of the support, financial and moral, of Gujarati merchants. When, in March 1904, the white press carried reports on the unsanitary habits of Indian shopkeepers, Pillay wrote to say that whereas the Tamils from the Madras Presidency were ‘immune from infectious diseases of all kinds’, the ‘Bombay Bunnias … are the most filthiest classes imaginable.’ Until about 1890, the Indians in the Transvaal were largely Tamils, but then merchants from Bombay and Gujarat arrived to spoil the show. Because of these Gujaratis, claimed Pillay, the  Indian community in general … are made to suffer for the criminal perversity of a section whose chronic antipathy to cleanliness, fanatical adherence to superstition in its grossest form, and mammon worship is a most prolific source of contagious disease of the most virulent form.9 Pillay signed his letter ‘late Secretary, Indian Congress, Pretoria and Johannesburg’. One does not know how many members his branch of the Congress had. At any rate, by 1906 Gandhi’s British Indian Association was clearly in the lead when it came to advancing the community’s cause. The rivalry was personal, but also communal. As a Tamil, Pillay spoke a different language from Gandhi and the Gujarati merchants. He may also have been originally from a different class, for his name suggests that his forefathers came to South Africa as indentured labourers. When the ‘deputation’ proceeded to London, Pillay made common cause with his fellow Tamil William Godfrey, a doctor from Natal now based in Johannesburg. The doctor’s rift with Gandhi was of more recent origin. Active in the British Indian Association, Dr Godfrey had been a featured speaker in the mass meeting held in the Empire Theatre on 11 September. He had hoped to be on the ship to London; however, when the BIA thought it wise to send a merchant as well, this left room for only one English-speaking professional, who, of course, had to be Gandhi. On 15 October, as the SS Armsdale made its way across the ocean, William Godfrey and C. M. Pillay sent a letter to the Secretary of State for the Colonies. This claimed that Gandhi and Ally had no mandate to represent the Indians; and added for good measure that the lawyer was a ‘well known professional agitator who has made money out of his work’. Gandhi was accused of having ‘caused an estrangement between Europeans and Indians’; and Ally of being a pan- Islamist whose allegiances were to the Sultan of Turkey rather than the British Crown. The petition sent by Pillay and Godfrey had more than a hundred names attached to it. Gandhi’s alert (and loyal) friend Henry Polak sought out its signatories. What he found was not edifying. A Tamil owner of an Indian laundry, persuaded by Godfrey that his omission from the delegation represented an affront to the Tamils, had placed a blank sheet of paper in front of forty-five of his workers, and got them to affix signatures and thumb-impressions. Told by Polak that his action had undermined Indian unity, the laundry-owner now  disavowed the petition.11 Two of Godfrey’s brothers, who had been Gandhi’s friends and clients in Natal, wrote to The Times disassociating themselves from their sibling. The British Indian Association wired the Secretary of State to say that Gandhi and Ally were their authorized representatives, and that the ‘entire Indian community indignantly repudiate[d]’ a campaign based on Godfrey’s ‘personal animus’. In London, the man who was at once the larger and lesser member of the deputation had fallen ill. The exact symptoms are unknown; but over-indulgence seems to have been the cause. Ally was rushed from the Hotel Cecil to Lady Margaret Hospital in the town of Bromley, ten miles south-east of Charing Cross. The hospital had been founded in 1903 by Josiah Oldfield, Gandhi’s old friend and flatmate from his student days. It was run on strict vegetarian principles, with treatment by diet replacing treatment by drugs. No meat or fish was permitted, nor any alcohol either. The food was cooked with coconut oil, then rather scarce in Britain. Gandhi wrote to Oldfield urging him to see Ally every day – ‘Your presence alone would be inspiring and cheering.’ He added that ‘expense is of no consideration’. To Ally himself Gandhi offered this explanation of his ill-health: ‘I am superstitious enough to say it was due to the cigar.’ His recovery might be ‘retarded by even one puff of the deadly cigar – such is my strong conviction regarding nicotine’. The next day Gandhi wrote to his compatriot in similar vein: ‘I beseech you to keep yourself religiously away from cigars. Certainly, have as much as you like of the hubble-bubble’ (which, with its tobacco diluted through water, presumably was less harmful). ‘Follow Dr Oldfield’s instructions implicitly,’ urged Gandhi. ‘I am certain that no other doctor could restore you to health with the same amount of despatch as Mr Oldfield.’ The last was said with some conviction, for Gandhi was consulting the same doctor himself. Back in the days when he was practising law in Bombay, Gandhi told Oldfield, he had lost his sense of smell; now he had chronic catarrh. He asked whether his friend could treat him, or instead recommend a throat specialist. Another ailment was related to their shared passion and lifestyle choices. ‘I think it was when I was carrying on a fruit-and-nut diet experiment,’ wrote Gandhi, ‘that I damaged my teeth. I believe that I had permanently  damaged two molars and I thought that I was going to lose one of them on board. I certainly tried hard to pull one out but I did not succeed. Would you see them or do you want me to go to a dentist?’ Although they were old friends, if Oldfield was to attend to either complaint Gandhi insisted on paying his professional fees. On 31 October, Gandhi wrote to the Secretary of State for the Colonies, Lord Elgin, requesting an appointment for a delegation consisting of himself, Ally and some well-placed Englishmen; a statement of the Indian case was attached. The meeting was scheduled for 8 November. Since Elgin was a former Viceroy, Gandhi asked some members of the Indian Civil Service to join the delegation. Since he was also a senior British politician, the former MP Dadabhai Naoroji and the serving MP M. M. Bhownaggree were asked to come too. Gandhi went three times to the House of Commons to meet the Liberal MP Harold Cox, who eventually also agreed to come. In the first week of November, Gandhi had several meetings with a radical and somewhat raffish Indian he knew would never fit into any formal delegation. His name was Shyamaji Krishnavarma. Twelve years older than Gandhi and also from Kathiawar, Krishnavarma had studied at Oxford and been called to the London Bar. Back in India, he held a series of jobs in the Kathiawari principalities before returning to England in 1905. Krishnavarma thought the Indian National Congress too loyalist by far; what he stood for was complete emancipation from British rule. He established an ‘India House’ at Highgate in London (not far from the cemetery where Karl Marx was buried), which served as a hostel for students and a forum for debate. Students who lived here took a pledge that they would not work for the colonial bureaucracy when they returned home. Krishnavarma also published a journal called The Indian Sociologist, which argued the case for freedom for subject peoples. His greatest English supporter was the socialist and anti-imperialist H. M. Hyndman. Gandhi knew of Krishnavarma’s work, for it had been written about in Indian Opinion. Now they met in London, where, to begin with at any rate, the younger man was intrigued by the older man. He was impressed by his learning – Krishnavarma knew Latin, Greek and Sanskrit – and somewhat intimidated by his passion. On successive Sundays, Gandhi passed up invitations to the Polak  household in order to debate Indian issues with him. As he wrote to Polak père, ‘the Pandit of whom I spoke to you and I have not finished the whole of our discussion, and as it is rather important I am afraid I must deprive myself of the pleasure’ (of meeting the father and his charming daughters).16 Later, in a report to Indian Opinion, Gandhi summarized the character and credo of his new friend in these words: Though he can afford to live in comfort, he lives in poverty. He dresses simply and lives like an ascetic. His mission is service to his country. The idea underlying his service is that there should be complete swaraj [freedom] for India and that the British should quit the country, handing over power to Indians. If they do not do so, the Indians should refuse them all help so that they become unable to carry on the administration and are forced to leave. He holds that unless this is done the people of India will never be happy. Everything else will follow swaraj.17 After a week in hospital, H. O. Ally moved back to the Hotel Cecil. However, on Oldfield’s advice, he had hour-long massages every evening, to make him fit for the meeting with the Secretary of State for the Colonies. Two days before meeting the deputation, Lord Elgin received a joint letter from five Indians from South Africa studying in London – three Christian, one Muslim and one Hindu. The letter was clearly prompted and very likely drafted by Gandhi. It detailed the disabilities under the laws being proposed in the Transvaal, noting that the signatories would not be able to gain entry into the colony on their return. It tellingly added: ‘We are here being nurtured in the teachings of Bentham, Austin, and other English writers whose names are a watchword for liberty and independence, and we could hardly believe that anything of the kind referred to above would possibly be applicable to us.’ On the afternoon of 8 November, Gandhi, Ally and ten others were at the Colonial Office to meet Lord Elgin. The first to speak was Sir Lepel Griffin, former Chief Secretary of the Punjab and current chairman of the East India Association. Here is the official transcript of part of what Griffin said: And against whom is this [offending] legislation directed? Against the most orderly, honourable, industrious, temperate race in the world, people of our own stock and blood, with whom our own language has as a sister-language been connected … And by whom is this legislation instigated? I am told, and I believe it, that it is not by the best part of the British community in the Transvaal, who are, I believe, in favour of giving all reasonable privileges to British Indian subjects; it is by the alien foreign population in the Transvaal who are perhaps to some extent inconvenienced by Indian traders who are so very much more temperate and industrious than themselves. It does not come from the English. The legislation is prompted, and the  prejudice against the Indians is encouraged, by the aliens, by Russian Jews, by Syrians, by German Jews, by every class of aliens, the very off-scourings of the international sewers of Europe. The two questions were pertinent, but Griffin’s answer to the second was extraordinary. From where and whence did this diatribe come? Was it a product of Sir Lepel Griffin’s own prejudices, or a more general pandering to the anti- Semitism then common among the British ruling class? In fact, it was Boers and Britons, Christians both, who had been in the forefront of the anti-Indian legislation. To be sure, some recent Jewish immigrants to the Transvaal were hostile to Indian traders who competed with them. Even so, Gandhi’s closest supporters were, as often as not, Jews such as Henry Polak, Hermann Kallenbach and Lewis Ritch. What did Gandhi think of Sir Lepel’s diatribe, as he heard it? Alas, the records are silent on the matter. Gandhi spoke next, and with sobriety. He explained how the new Ordinance violated the ‘fundamental maxim of the British law’ that everyone was presumed innocent unless proven otherwise; it ‘brands every Indian as guilty’. It originally applied to women too, but as a result of their protests at least this had been withdrawn. The larger worry was that it would be applied elsewhere, that ‘what the Transvaal thinks today the other Colonies think tomorrow.’ H. O. Ally spoke briefly, endorsing Gandhi’s stand and emphasizing that they were ‘loyal British subjects’ who did not demand political parity. ‘We are content that the white man should be predominant in the Transvaal,’ said Ally, ‘but we do feel that we are entitled to all the other ordinary rights that a British subject should enjoy.’ The Indian MP M. M. Bhownaggree also spoke. He invoked the duty Elgin owed India and Indians, as the ‘custodian and guardian of Indian interests and the protector of their rights, during a memorable and distinguished viceroyalty’. Dadabhai Naoroji drew attention to the political traditions of the party of which he, like the Colonial Secretary, was a member. ‘If there is one principle more important than another,’ remarked Naoroji, ‘it is that of the freedom of British subjects under the British flag, and I do hope that the British Government, especially a Liberal Government, will stand upon that basis.’ (It was characteristic that the Indian Tory stressed the official’s duty, whereas the Indian Liberal emphasized a broader principle.)  Having heard everybody out, Elgin then responded. He did not think ‘that the impression of thumb mark in itself should be a very debasing operation’. Gandhi interjected that it was a ten-finger mark that was required, which in India was asked for only in the case of criminals. Elgin replied, ‘I do not want to argue it, but I think that there is just that much to be said.’ He then turned to the forces behind the new legislation. He had received many telegrams from different (white) municipalities in the Transvaal urging him to pass the Ordinance. ‘I cannot, therefore, entirely subscribe to what Sir Lepel Griffin said about the opposition [of whites to Indians].’ He admitted that had he been in the India Office rather than the Colonial Office, he might have himself signed dispatches ‘protesting, in as strong language as has been used here, against the restrictions on British citizens’. However, placed where he was, he had to recognize the fact that all over the world there are difficulties arising on the part of white communities, and we have to reckon with them. I do not say that they ought always to succeed; they certainly ought not to succeed in points of detail which would, in any way, involve oppression. But the fact of there being that sentiment has to be borne in mind when we have to deal with matters of this description. He ended with a carefully worded equivocation: ‘I have now heard what Mr Gandhi had to say … I have heard the other gentlemen who have accompanied him. I will give the best consideration to their representations, and I shall think it my duty to make up my mind with the full responsibility which I have to assume.’ Writing to Henry Polak, Gandhi, ever the optimist, described his meeting with Elgin as ‘exceedingly good’.21 For his part, the Secretary of State for the Colonies was now persuaded that Gandhi and Ally were ‘really representative of the majority of their compatriots’. Elgin wrote to the Transvaal Government that while he appreciated the force of white sentiment, he would not want to advise Royal Assent to the new legislation just yet. He asked them ‘to favour me with a further expression of your own opinion on the question, in view of the strong, and, as I gather, somewhat unexpected, opposition with which the Ordinance has been met by the majority of the Indian community.’ Two days after Gandhi’s delegation met Lord Elgin, The Times printed a long article on its mission. Before the Anglo-Boer War, perhaps the Imperial Government could have intervened in favour of the Indians, but it would ‘be injudicious, and indeed impracticable, to attempt to settle such a question from  Downing Street now, when the colony will enjoy within a few months all the rights of responsible government.’ The paper explained why the Indians’ claims and demands could not, or rather would not, be conceded: No young democratic community of white men can be expected to deal out even-handed justice to formidable rivals in their trade and business who come from another race, with other traditions, other creeds, and other complexions than their own. The fact that the interlopers are subjects of the same Sovereign, and can claim to be treated as members of the same Empire, will probably never, in our time, outweigh these considerations with them. The lapse of years, and perhaps of generations, may be needed to create, if indeed it can ever be created, such a spirit of common Imperial citizenship as will greatly mitigate the combined force of race prejudice and of self-interest.23 As a student, Mohandas Gandhi had proved impervious to the delights and distractions of London. Plays, parties and cricket matches did not interest him then. Now he had neither the interest nor the time. He worked from nine in the morning until midnight, lobbying editors, politicians and other men of influence. They, and others like them, were besieged by a torrent of letters. Apparently, as many as 5,000 penny stamps were used by the delegation. Among the men Gandhi met in pursuit of his case was the campaigning journalist W. T. Stead. Stead had famously – or perhaps notoriously – been sympathetic to the Boer cause during the War, abandoning his earlier support for the imperialism of Cecil Rhodes. Gandhi asked him now to write an article on the Indian question in ‘your own graphic style’; he had ‘no doubt that some at least of the Boer leaders would listen to you and give effect to your suggestions’.Stead did not write the article requested, but other grandees were more amenable to Gandhi’s lobbying. The doctor and naturalist George Birdwood, an old India hand, was deeply impressed with Gandhi’s petition to Elgin. He read it ‘with the greatest personal delight for the evidence it affords of the ability and wisdom with which young Hindoos like you can handle such intricate and trying [questions of] Imperial policy’. The rejection of the Indian plea, thought Birdwood, would be an ‘irretrievable blow to the consolidation of the [British] Empire’. In his view, there was no historical people on earth – not even the Scots – who have a better conceit of themselves or better deserve [it] than the Hindoos, who have given India her immemorial name and fame, and a wanton outrage against their racial pride such as that by which they are affronted in South Africa, will strike a deadly blow to their loyalty towards the British ‘Raj’ which is the mightiest corner-stone of our world-wide Empire.25  Meanwhile, pressed by Gandhi, the liberal MPs Harold Cox and Henry Cotton raised a series of questions in Parliament on the harassment of Indians in the Transvaal. They were answered by the Under-Secretary of State, Winston Churchill, a man noticeably sympathetic to the idea that white and brown could never mix. One question related to an eviction notice issued to about a hundred Indian traders in the Johannesburg locality of Vrededorp. The traders had been there for years, and their vested property was valued at £20,000. When Cotton asked why the Indians were made to vacate their stands, Churchill said that there were also Boer traders operating in the market, and ‘it is very desirable to keep the white and Coloured quarters apart, as the practice of allowing European, Asiatic, and native families to live side by side in [a] mixed community is fraught with many evils, and, in Lord Selborne’s opinion, is injurious to the social well-being of all three.’ Gandhi immediately wrote to Lord Elgin, taking issue with Churchill’s claims. He said, first, that the Indians in the suburb had legally acquired rights of residence; second, that Indian shops, described by Churchill as ‘tin shanties’, were in fact ‘superior to many of the buildings in Vrededorp’; and third, and most tellingly, that if the doctrine of the desirability of keeping the white and the Coloured quarters apart is sound, I fear that there will be an end to British Indian residence in the Transvaal with any degree of self- respect. The logical conclusion of such a doctrine will be a system of locations which can only result in ruination to hundreds of law-abiding and respectable Indians.27 On 27 November, Gandhi and Ally met the Under-Secretary of State in his rooms in the Colonial Office. Churchill asked them to send him a short note, no longer than one foolscap page, of what they ‘had to say on this Ordinance, on the Vrededorp Stands Ordinance and on the question as a whole’. Ally then reminded him that he was the same person who had been present at the Point [in Durban] to receive Mr Churchill on his return from the [Boer] war. And it was the same Mr Churchill that he now pleaded for redress on behalf of the Indian community. Mr Churchill smiled, patted Mr Ally on the back and said he would do all he could. This answer added to our hopes.28 His experiences in the imperial capital, meeting doors open, closed and ajar, convinced Gandhi that the Indians needed an organized body to represent them in London. Working via the mail and the telephone, he established a South  Africa British Indian Committee (SABIC), which was supported by, among others, Griffin, Naoroji and Bhownaggree. L. W. Ritch, his friend from Johannesburg who had now qualified as a lawyer in London, would serve as secretary. ‘I have not told you all about Mr Ritch’s capabilities,’ wrote Gandhi to Bhownaggree. He has handled many a meeting and has been secretary of more than one organization. He was twenty years ago perhaps what people may call a rabid Socialist. His has been a most chequered career. Today, I do not own a friend who knows me more than he does. He is one of those men who believe in dying for a cause that he holds dear.29 It was Bhownaggree who chaired a farewell meeting for the deputation. This was held on 29 November, in the Richelieu Room of the Hotel Cecil. In attendance were an array of pro-Indian members of the British Establishment, among them the former Governor of Bombay, Lord Reay; the former Principal of the Mohammedan Anglo-Oriental College, Theodore Morrison; sundry ex-I. C. S. officials and serving Members of Parliament. Those with more personal connections to Gandhi included J. H. L. Polak (father of Henry) and Dr Josiah Oldfield.30 Speaking to the gathering, Gandhi singled out the Indian students in the room, whose predicament highlighted the trouble in the Transvaal. These young men contemplated their return to South Africa ‘with considerable anxiety and apprehension’; they worried they would share the fate of the dispossessed Indians in the colony. For, as Gandhi observed, ‘here, in England, they will become barristers or doctors, but there, in South Africa, they may not even be able to cross the border of the Transvaal.’ Gandhi’s energetic lobbying in London alarmed the Transvaal Government. As the deputation sailed back to South Africa, the colony’s Lieutenant-Governor wrote to his boss grumbling that ‘His Majesty’s Government have evidently been greatly impressed by the representation of Messrs. Gandhi and Ally.’The Governor of the Transvaal, Lord Selborne, then wrote a letter to his superior, the Secretary of State for the Colonies, pointing out that the Ordinance was ‘regarded almost unanimously by the European community as being vital to the best interests of the Colony’. He defended the proposal to make registration compulsory, and warned that the provision of appeal to the Supreme Court  (which the Indians were agitating for) would defeat the legislation’s purpose, since ‘experience has shown how difficult it is when once an Asiatic has entered the country to find him again’. The Governor remarked that Mr Gandhi must know better than most people that there is an extensive traffic in permits and registration certificates, and he has had unique experience of the ease with which the Courts can be moved (and rightly so while the law remains as it is) to upset any administrative action which is intended to carry out an effective control over immigration. The parenthetical comment scarcely served to soften what was a direct insinuation against Gandhi’s motives: namely, that he had a vested interest in the old law, and in profitably fighting court cases under it. Selborne then explained the larger project of which the Ordinance was part. ‘Every patriotic South African,’ he wrote, looks forward to the establishment of a large and vigorous European population here … The immigration of an Asiatic population on a large scale he regards as a menace to the realisation of this ideal. He sees already in Natal a picture which impresses even the casual observer of the rapidity with which the Asiatic is filling a place in trade, and now even in agriculture, which otherwise would have afforded scope for a growing European population. He sees the same process at work in the Transvaal, more slowly at present, but, capable, as he believes, of rapid acceleration. He is quite willing to recognise the claims which British Indians naturally have on His Majesty’s Government, but he protests against, and is prepared to resist, those claims when they involve the peopling of his country which he believes to be fitted to be the home of a strong European nation with a people who can never be to him anything but an alien race.33 This defence of the white case begged a crucial question – why were the Indians more ‘alien’ than the Europeans? Unlike the Africans, neither had originated in the continent. Both groups had come from across the oceans, the Europeans from the West, the Indians from the East, each seeking better prospects for themselves and their families. The Europeans now claimed that South Africa was their home. But why couldn’t the Indians be likewise ‘patriotic’ about a land where they too lived and worked? Evidently, the Indians were seen as the main, perhaps only, threat to the creation of a settler state to be ruled and dominated by whites, with a submissive native population alongside. For South Africa to become more like Australia, Canada and New Zealand, it was imperative that no more Indians were allowed into the territory. The intensity and passion, even paranoia, that characterized the presentation of the colonists’ case was an indirect tribute to Gandhi. The opposition led by him had unnerved and unsettled them. To the Governor’s private warnings were  now added a book published in London with the alarmist title, The Asiatic Danger to the Colonies. Written by the Johannesburg journalist L. E. Neame, this aimed at influencing ‘home’ opinion against the Indians, and thus smoothing the path for the new policies in the Transvaal. Neame was particularly worried by the rise of nationalism in India, as manifest in the Swadeshi movement. He warned that ‘the idea is gaining ground that a weak spot has been found in the armour of Europe.’ This activist spirit would not just be aimed at British rule in India; it ‘may be used for the forcing of many a closed door’. Like Europe, Asia ‘too needs room for its surplus population’; hence the demand, led by Gandhi, to allow Indians the freedom to move to South Africa on the grounds that it was also part of the British Empire. It was not, however, merely a question of competing numbers. As Neame acutely observed, ‘the Asiatic has another fault – from the white man’s standpoint. He is ambitious. The plantation coolie may die a coolie; his son may become a landowner, or a small trader or storekeeper, even a merchant on a considerable scale.’ As successive generations of Indians graduated to more sophisticated occupations, they took away jobs and trades previously monopolized by the whites. And so this European in Johannesburg plaintively asked: ‘What is to be their future if the Indian works in the farm, owns the store, and performs skilled labour in the factory?’ Gandhi and company, complained Neame, had mobilized the support of ‘Members of Parliament who know India but not the Colonies’. To counteract this, the colonist appealed to the baser instincts of the mother country, by arguing that in the end the colony with the largest Asiatic population where white men should dwell will be of least value to the Empire. It is an economic axiom that the white man consumes more than the Asiatic. The trade of a colony with a big white population must be more remunerative to England than that of a colony where a decreasing white population is struggling hard against the competition of the Eastern peoples.34 L. E. Neame was answered by Henry Polak, a European who had crossed the racial divide to stand up for the underdog. In a four-part review in Indian Opinion, Polak (writing as ‘The Editor’), accused Neame of a ‘Caucasian bias’, as one ‘who does not question the ultimate and inherent superiority of the white race’ while relegating ‘the disturbing Asiatic to the limbo of permanent  inferiority’. By dividing the world into Asiatic and non-Asiatic, Neame had shown that he ‘does not, evidently, believe in the brotherhood of man and his unity with Nature. He cannot conceive that men are moulded, all the world over, in the same general way by the same series of circumstances.’ Of Neame’s argument that Asiatic traders would swamp white competition, Polak archly noted that ‘his plea is not that the white man should make a living, but that the Asiatic should not.’ For if the Caucasians were indeed ‘inherently superior’, then what is the added advantage to be derived from Registration Laws, Immigration Acts, commercial barriers, protective walls [and other such methods] … betokening, not a calm self-assurance, not a strong sense of breathing a purer atmosphere than that breathed by any other, but a mortal fear lest the phantom of an alleged superiority should be discovered and exposed to public derision – a terror lest the windy dummy of inflated self-importance be pricked.35 Gandhi and company did not really want to challenge, still less overthrow, European rule in the Transvaal. What they asked for was the safeguarding of existing and previously guaranteed rights of residence, trade and travel. They had said time and again that the political superiority of the whites was not in question, but the ruling race was not reassured. Unlike the Africans, the Indians were adept at trade and (as Gandhi’s own example had shown) at the professions. Here they directly competed with Europeans. The danger in admitting more Indians was that the economic challenge would intensify, leading to claims for political representation as well. Hence, as L. E. Neame put it, the door had to be firmly shut to the Indians.            