    
  I  
 A    
 
HI
  
I    .
Conﬁdential.
JANUARY , 1840.
To MESSRS —— —
GENTLEMEN: — In obedience to a resolution of the
Whig State convention, we have appointed you the Central
Whig Committee of your county. The trust conﬁded to you
will be one of watchfulness and labor; but we hope the
glory of having contributed to the overthrow of the corrupt
powers that now control our beloved country will be a
suﬀicient reward for the time and labor you will devote to
it. Our Whig brethren throughout the Union have met in
convention, 
and 
after 
due 
deliberation 
and 
mutual
concessions have elected candidates for the Presidency and
Vice-Presidency not only worthy of our cause, but worthy of
the support of every true patriot who would have our
country redeemed, and her institutions honestly and
faithfully administered. To overthrow the trained bands
that are opposed to us whose salaried oﬀicers are ever on
the watch, and whose misguided followers are ever ready
to obey their smallest commands, every Whig must not only
know his duty, but must ﬁrmly resolve, whatever of time
and labor it may cost, boldly and faithfully to do it. Our
intention is to organize the whole State, so that every Whig
 can be brought to the polls in the coming Presidential
contest. We cannot do this, however, without your co-
operation; and as we do our duty, so we shall expect you to
do yours. After due deliberation, the following is the plan of
organization, and the duties required of each county
committee:
(1) To divide their county into small districts, and to
appoint in each a subcommittee, whose duty it shall be to
make a perfect list of all the voters in their respective
districts, and to ascertain with certainty for whom they will
vote. If they meet with men who are doubtful as to the man
they will support, such voters should be designated in
separate lines, with the name of the man they will probably
support.
(2) It will be the duty of said subcommittee to keep a
constant watch on the doubtful voters, and from time to
time have them talked to by those in whom they have the
most conﬁdence, and also to place in their hands such
documents as will enlighten and inﬂuence them.
(3) It will also be their duty to report to you, at least once
a month, the progress they are making, and on election
days see that every Whig is brought to the polls.
(4) The subcommittees should be appointed immediately;
and by the last of April, at least, they should make their
ﬁrst report.
(5) On the ﬁrst of each month hereafter we shall expect
to hear from you. After the ﬁrst report of your
subcommittees, unless there should be found a great many
doubtful voters, you can tell pretty accurately the manner
 in which your county will vote. In each of your letters to us,
you will state the number of certain votes both for and
against us, as well as the number of doubtful votes, with
your opinion of the manner in which they will be cast.
(6) When we have heard from all the counties, we shall
be able to tell with similar accuracy the political
complexion of the State. This information will be forwarded
to you as soon as received.
(7) Inclosed is a prospectus for a newspaper to be
continued until after the Presidential election. It will be
superintended by ourselves, and every Whig in the State
must take it. It will be published so low that every one can
aﬀord it. You must raise a fund and forward us for extra
copies, — every county ought to send — ﬁfty or one
hundred dollars, — and the copies will be forwarded to you
for distribution among our political opponents. The paper
will be devoted exclusively to the great cause in which we
are engaged. Procure subscriptions, and forward them to
us immediately.
(8) Immediately after any election in your county, you
must inform us of its results; and as early as possible after
any general election we will give you the like information.
(9) A senator in Congress is to be elected by our next
Legislature. Let no local interests divide you, but select
candidates that can succeed.
(10) Our plan of operations will of course be concealed
from every one except our good friends who of right ought
to know them.
 Trusting much in our good cause, the strength of our
candidates, and the determination of the Whigs everywhere
to do their duty, we go to the work of organization in this
State conﬁdent of success. We have the numbers, and if
properly organized and exerted, with the gallant Harrison
at our head, we shall meet our foes and conquer them in all
parts of the Union.
Address your letters to Dr. A. G. Henry, R. F, Barrett; A.
Lincoln, E. D. Baker, J. F. Speed.
  
  
H
  .    A  .
SPRINGFIELD, March 1, 1840
DEAR STUART:
I have never seen the prospects of our party so bright in
these parts as they are now. We shall carry this county by a
larger majority than we did in 1836, when you ran against
May. I do not think my prospects, individually, are very
ﬂattering, for I think it probable I shall not be permitted to
be a candidate; but the party ticket will succeed
triumphantly. Subscriptions to the “Old Soldier” pour in
without abatement. This morning I took from the post oﬀice
a letter from Dubois enclosing the names of sixty
subscribers, and on carrying it to Francis I found he had
received one hundred and forty more from other quarters
by the same day’s mail. That is but an average specimen of
every day’s receipts. Yesterday Douglas, having chosen to
consider himself insulted by something in the Journal,
undertook to cane Francis in the street. Francis caught him
by the hair and jammed him back against a market cart
where the matter ended by Francis being pulled away from
him. The whole aﬀair was so ludicrous that Francis and
everybody else (Douglass excepted) have been laughing
about it ever since.
 I send you the names of some of the V.B. men who have
come out for Harrison about town, and suggest that you
send them some documents.
Moses Coﬀman (he let us appoint him a delegate
yesterday), Aaron Coﬀman, George Gregory, H. M. Briggs,
Johnson (at Birchall’s Bookstore), Michael Glyn, Armstrong
(not Hosea nor Hugh, but a carpenter), Thomas Hunter,
Moses Pileher (he was always a Whig and deserves
attention), Matthew Crowder Jr., Greenberry Smith; John
Fagan, George Fagan, William Fagan (these three fell out
with us about Early, and are doubtful now), John M.
Cartmel, Noah Rickard, John Rickard, Walter Marsh.
The foregoing should be addressed at Springﬁeld.
Also send some to Solomon Miller and John Auth at
Salisbury. Also to Charles Harper, Samuel Harper, and B. C.
Harper, and T. J. Scroggins, John Scroggins at Pulaski,
Logan County.
Speed says he wrote you what Jo Smith said about you as
he passed here. We will procure the names of some of his
people here, and send them to you before long. Speed also
says you must not fail to send us the New York Journal he
wrote for some time since.
Evan Butler is jealous that you never send your
compliments to him. You must not neglect him next time.
Your friend, as ever, A. LINCOLN
    
 
 I
 I
  H  I  I
I    
I  A 
  .
November 28, 1840.
IN THE ILLINOIS House of Representatives, November 28,
1840, Mr. Lincoln oﬀered the following: Resolved, That so
much of the governor’s message as relates to fraudulent
voting, and other fraudulent practices at elections, be
referred to the Committee on Elections, with instructions to
said committee to prepare and report to the House a bill for
such an act as may in their judgment aﬀord the greatest
possible protection of the elective franchise against all
frauds of all sorts whatever.
    
 
 I
 I
  H  I  I
I    
I  A 
  .
December 2, 1840.
RESOLVED, 
THAT 
THE 
Committee 
on 
Education 
be
instructed to inquire into the expediency of providing by
law for the examination as to the qualiﬁcation of persons
oﬀering themselves as school teachers, that no teacher
shall receive any part of the public school fund who shall
not have successfully passed such examination, and that
they report by bill or otherwise.
   
A    I
  H  I  I
I    
I  A 
  .
December 4, 1840
IN THE HOUSE of Representatives, Illinois, December 4,
1840, on presentation of a report respecting petition of H.
N. Purple, claiming the seat of Mr. Phelps from Peoria, Mr.
Lincoln moved that the House resolve itself into Committee
of the Whole on the question, and take it up immediately.
Mr. Lincoln considered the question of the highest
importance whether an individual had a right to sit in this
House or not. The course he should propose would be to
take up the evidence and decide upon the facts seriatim.
Mr. Drummond wanted time; they could not decide in the
heat of debate, etc.
Mr. Lincoln thought that the question had better be gone
into now. In courts of law jurors were required to decide on
evidence, without previous study or examination. They
were required to know nothing of the subject until the
evidence was laid before them for their immediate decision.
He thought that the heat of party would be augmented by
delay.
The Speaker called Mr. Lincoln to order as being
irrelevant; no mention had been made of party heat.
Mr. Drummond said he had only spoken of debate. Mr.
Lincoln asked what caused the heat, if it was not party? Mr.
 Lincoln concluded by urging that the question would be
decided now better than hereafter, and he thought with less
heat and excitement.
(Further debate, in which Lincoln participated.)
   
A    I
  H  I  I
I    
I  A 
  .
December 4, 1840.
IN THE ILLINOIS House of Representatives, December 4,
1840, House in Committee of the Whole on the bill
providing for payment of interest on the State debt, — Mr.
Lincoln moved to strike out the body and amendments of
the bill, and insert in lieu thereof an amendment which in
substance was that the governor be authorized to issue
bonds for the payment of the interest; that these be called
“interest bonds”; that the taxes accruing on Congress lands
as they become taxable be irrevocably set aside and
devoted as a fund to the payment of the interest bonds. Mr.
Lincoln went into the reasons which appeared to him to
render this plan preferable to that of hypothecating the
State bonds. By this course we could get along till the next
meeting of the Legislature, which was of great importance.
To the objection which might be urged that these interest
bonds could not be cashed, he replied that if our other
bonds could, much more could these, which oﬀered a
perfect security, a fund being irrevocably set aside to
provide for their redemption. To another objection, that we
should be paying compound interest, he would reply that
the rapid growth and increase of our resources was in so
great a ratio as to outstrip the diﬀiculty; that his object was
 to do the best that could be done in the present emergency.
All agreed that the faith of the State must be preserved;
this plan appeared to him preferable to a hypothecation of
bonds, which would have to be redeemed and the interest
paid. How this was to be done, he could not see; therefore
he had, after turning the matter over in every way, devised
this measure, which would carry us on till the next
Legislature.
(Mr. Lincoln spoke at some length, advocating his
measure.) Lincoln advocated his measure, December 11,
1840.
December 12, 1840, he had thought some permanent
provision ought to be made for the bonds to be
hypothecated, but was satisﬁed taxation and revenue could
not be connected with it now.
