    
  
  
H
  .    A   
 
 
      I
SPRINGFIELD, Jan 23, 1841
DEAR STUART: I am now the most miserable man living.
If what I feel were equally distributed to the whole human
family, there would not be one cheerful face on earth.
Whether I shall ever be better, I cannot tell; I awfully
forbode I shall not. To remain as I am is impossible. I must
die or be better, as it appears to me.... I fear I shall be
unable to attend any business here, and a change of scene
might help me. If I could be myself, I would rather remain
at home with Judge Logan. I can write no more.
   
A    I
  H  I  I
I    
I  A 
  .
January 23, 1841
IN THE HOUSE of Representatives January 23, 1841, while
discussing the continuation of the Illinois and Michigan
Canal, Mr. Moore was afraid the holders of the “scrip”
would lose.
Mr. Napier thought there was no danger of that; and Mr.
Lincoln said he had not examined to see what amount of
scrip would probably be needed. The principal point in his
mind was this, that nobody was obliged to take these
certiﬁcates. It is altogether voluntary on their part, and if
they apprehend it will fall in their hands they will not take
it. Further the loss, if any there be, will fall on the citizens
of that section of the country.
This scrip is not going to circulate over an extensive
range of country, but will be conﬁned chieﬂy to the vicinity
of the canal. Now, we ﬁnd the representatives of that
section of the country are all in favor of the bill.
When we propose to protect their interests, they say to
us: Leave us to take care of ourselves; we are willing to run
the risk. And this is reasonable; we must suppose they are
competent to protect their own interests, and it is only fair
to let them do it.
  I  
 A    
 
HI
  
I    .
February 9, 1841.
APPEAL TO THE People of the State of Illinois.
FELLOW-CITIZENS: — When the General Assembly, now
about adjourning, assembled in November last, from the
bankrupt state of the public treasury, the pecuniary
embarrassments prevailing in every department of society,
the dilapidated state of the public works, and the
impending danger of the degradation of the State, you had
a right to expect that your representatives would lose no
time in devising and adopting measures to avert threatened
calamities, alleviate the distresses of the people, and allay
the fearful apprehensions in regard to the future prosperity
of the State. It was not expected by you that the spirit of
party would take the lead in the councils of the State, and
make every interest bend to its demands. Nor was it
expected that any party would assume to itself the entire
control of legislation, and convert the means and oﬀices of
the State, and the substance of the people, into aliment for
party subsistence. Neither could it have been expected by
you that party spirit, however strong its desires and
unreasonable 
its 
demands, 
would 
have 
passed 
the
sanctuary of the Constitution, and entered with its
 unhallowed and hideous form into the formation of the
judiciary system.
At the early period of the session, measures were
adopted by the dominant party to take possession of the
State, to ﬁll all public oﬀices with party men, and make
every measure aﬀecting the interests of the people and the
credit of the State operate in furtherance of their party
views. The merits of men and measures therefore became
the subject of discussion in caucus, instead of the halls of
legislation, and decisions there made by a minority of the
Legislature have been executed and carried into eﬀect by
the force of party discipline, without any regard whatever
to the rights of the people or the interests of the State. The
Supreme Court of the State was organized, and judges
appointed, according to the provisions of the Constitution,
in 1824. The people have never complained of the
organization of that court; no attempt has ever before been
made to change that department. Respect for public
opinion, and regard for the rights and liberties of the
people, have hitherto restrained the spirit of party from
attacks upon the independence and integrity of the
judiciary. The same judges have continued in oﬀice since
1824; their decisions have not been the subject of
complaint among the people; the integrity and honesty of
the court have not been questioned, and it has never been
supposed that the court has ever permitted party prejudice
or party considerations to operate upon their decisions. The
court was made to consist of four judges, and by the
Constitution two form a quorum for the transaction of
 business. With this tribunal, thus constituted, the people
have been satisﬁed for near sixteen years. The same law
which 
organized 
the 
Supreme 
Court 
in 
1824 
also
established and organized circuit courts to be held in each
county in the State, and ﬁve circuit judges were appointed
to hold those courts. In 1826 the Legislature abolished
these circuit courts, repealed the judges out of oﬀice, and
required the judges of the Supreme Court to hold the
circuit courts. The reasons assigned for this change were,
ﬁrst, that the business of the country could be better
attended to by the four judges of the Supreme Court than
by the two sets of judges; and, second, the state of the
public treasury forbade the employment of unnecessary
oﬀicers. In 1828 a circuit was established north of the
Illinois River, in order to meet the wants of the people, and
a circuit judge was appointed to hold the courts in that
circuit.
In 1834 the circuit-court system was again established
throughout the State, circuit judges appointed to hold the
courts, and the judges of the Supreme Court were relieved
from the performance of circuit court duties. The change
was recommended by the then acting governor of the State,
General W. L. D. Ewing, in the following terms: “The
augmented population of the State, the multiplied number
of organized counties, as well as the increase of business in
all, has long since convinced every one conversant with this
department of our government of the indispensable
necessity of an alteration in our judiciary system, and the
subject is therefore recommended to the earnest patriotic
 consideration of the Legislature. The present system has
never been exempt from serious and weighty objections.
The idea of appealing from the circuit court to the same
judges in the Supreme Court is recommended by little
hopes of redress to the injured party below. The duties of
the circuit, too, it may be added, consume one half of the
year, leaving a small and inadequate portion of time (when
that required for domestic purposes is deducted) to erect,
in the decisions of the Supreme Court, a judicial monument
of legal learning and research, which the talent and ability
of the court might otherwise be entirely competent to.”
With this organization of circuit courts the people have
never complained. The only complaints which we have
heard have come from circuits which were so large that the
judges could not dispose of the business, and the circuits in
which Judges Pearson and Ralston lately presided.
Whilst the honor and credit of the State demanded
legislation upon the subject of the public debt, the canal,
the unﬁnished public works, and the embarrassments of
the people, the judiciary stood upon a basis which required
no change — no legislative action. Yet the party in power,
neglecting every interest requiring legislative action, and
wholly disregarding the rights, wishes, and interests of the
people, has, for the unholy purpose of providing places for
its partisans and supplying them with large salaries,
disorganized that department of the government. Provision
is made for the election of ﬁve party judges of the Supreme
Court, the proscription of four circuit judges, and the
appointment of party clerks in more than half the counties
 of the State. Men professing respect for public opinion, and
acknowledged to be leaders of the party, have avowed in
the halls of legislation that the change in the judiciary was
intended to produce political results favorable to their
party and party friends. The immutable principles of justice
are to make way for party interests, and the bonds of social
order are to be rent in twain, in order that a desperate
faction may be sustained at the expense of the people. The
change proposed in the judiciary was supported upon
grounds so destructive to the institutions of the country,
and so entirely at war with the rights and liberties of the
people, that the party could not secure entire unanimity in
its support, three Democrats of the Senate and ﬁve of the
House voting against the measure. They were unwilling to
see the temples of justice and the seats of independent
judges occupied by the tools of faction. The declarations of
the party leaders, the selection of party men for judges, and
the total disregard for the public will in the adoption of the
measure, prove conclusively that the object has been not
reform, but destruction; not the advancement of the
highest interests of the State, but the predominance of
party.
We cannot in this manner undertake to point out all the
objections to this party measure; we present you with those
stated by the Council of Revision upon returning the bill,
and we ask for them a candid consideration.
Believing that the independence of the judiciary has been
destroyed, that hereafter our courts will be independent of
the people, and entirely dependent upon the Legislature;
 that our rights of property and liberty of conscience can no
longer be regarded as safe from the encroachments of
unconstitutional legislation; and knowing of no other
remedy which can be adopted consistently with the peace
and good order of society, we call upon you to avail
yourselves of the opportunity aﬀorded, and, at the next
general election, vote for a convention of the people.
S. H. LITTLE,
E. D. BAKER,
J. J. HARDIN,
E. B. WEBS,
A. LINCOLN,
J. GILLESPIE,
Committee on behalf of the Whig members of the
Legislature.
 A
AI
    H    
 
A
I A I
 
   H
 
I IA  .
E TRACT FROM A PROTEST IN THE ILLINOIS
LEGISLATURE
FEBRUARY 26, 1841
For the reasons thus presented, and for others no less
apparent, the undersigned cannot assent to the passage of
the bill, or permit it to become a law, without this evidence
of their disapprobation; and they now protest against the
reorganization of the judiciary, because — (1) It violates the
great principles of free government by subjecting the
judiciary to the Legislature. (2) It is a fatal blow at the
independence of the judges and the constitutional term of
their oﬀice. (3) It is a measure not asked for, or wished for,
by the people. (4) It will greatly increase the expense of our
courts, or else greatly diminish their utility. (5) It will give
our courts a political and partisan character, thereby
impairing public conﬁdence in their decisions. (6) It will
impair our standing with other States and the world. (7)It is
a party measure for party purposes, from which no
practical good to the people can possibly arise, but which
may be the source of immeasurable evils.
The undersigned are well aware that this protest will be
altogether unavailing with the majority of this body. The
 blow has already fallen, and we are compelled to stand by,
the mournful spectators of the ruin it will cause.
[Signed by 35 members, among whom was Abraham
Lincoln.]
  
  
 H A  .     
 
 
 
    A 
SPRINGFIELD June 19, 1841.
DEAR SPEED: — We have had the highest state of
excitement here for a week past that our community has
ever witnessed; and, although the public feeling is
somewhat allayed, the curious aﬀair which aroused it is
very far from being even yet cleared of mystery. It would
take a quire of paper to give you anything like a full
account of it, and I therefore only propose a brief outline.
The chief personages in the drama are Archibald Fisher,
supposed to be murdered, and Archibald Trailor, Henry
Trailor, and William Trailor, supposed to have murdered
him. The three Trailors are brothers: the ﬁrst, Arch., as you
know, lives in town; the second, Henry, in Clary’s Grove;
and the third, William, in Warren County; and Fisher, the
supposed murdered, being without a family, had made his
home with William. On Saturday evening, being the 29th of
May, Fisher and William came to Henry’s in a one-horse
dearborn, and there stayed over Sunday; and on Monday all
three came to Springﬁeld (Henry on horseback) and joined
Archibald at Myers’s, the Dutch carpenter. That evening at
supper Fisher was missing, and so next morning some
ineﬀectual search was made for him; and on Tuesday, at
one o’clock P.M., William and Henry started home without
 him. In a day or two Henry and one or two of his Clary-
Grove neighbors came back for him again, and advertised
his disappearance in the papers. The knowledge of the
matter thus far had not been general, and here it dropped
entirely, till about the 10th instant, when Keys received a
letter from the postmaster in Warren County, that William
had arrived at home, and was telling a very mysterious and
improbable story about the disappearance of Fisher, which
induced the community there to suppose he had been
disposed of unfairly. Keys made this letter public, which
immediately set the whole town and adjoining county agog.
And so it has continued until yesterday. The mass of the
people commenced a systematic search for the dead body,
while Wickersham was despatched to arrest Henry Trailor
at the Grove, and Jim Maxcy to Warren to arrest William.
On Monday last, Henry was brought in, and showed an
evident inclination to insinuate that he knew Fisher to be
dead, and that Arch. and William had killed him. He said he
guessed the body could be found in Spring Creek, between
the Beardstown road and Hickox’s mill. Away the people
swept like a herd of buﬀalo, and cut down Hickox’s mill-
dam nolens volens, to draw the water out of the pond, and
then went up and down and down and up the creek, ﬁshing
and raking, and raking and ducking and diving for two
days, and, after all, no dead body found.
In the meantime a sort of scuﬄing-ground had been
found in the brush in the angle, or point, where the road
leading into the woods past the brewery and the one
leading in past the brick-yard meet. From the scuﬄe-
 ground was the sign of something about the size of a man
having been dragged to the edge of the thicket, where it
joined the track of some small-wheeled carriage drawn by
one horse, as shown by the road-tracks. The carriage-track
led oﬀ toward Spring Creek. Near this drag-trail Dr.
Merryman found two hairs, which, after a long scientiﬁc
examination, he pronounced to be triangular human hairs,
which term, he says, includes within it the whiskers, the
hair growing under the arms and on other parts of the
body; and he judged that these two were of the whiskers,
because the ends were cut, showing that they had
ﬂourished in the neighborhood of the razor’s operations.
On Thursday last Jim Maxcy brought in William Trailor
from Warren. On the same day Arch. was arrested and put
in jail. Yesterday (Friday) William was put upon his
examining trial before May and Lovely. Archibald and
Henry were both present. Lamborn prosecuted, and Logan,
Baker, and your humble servant defended. A great many
witnesses were introduced and examined, but I shall only
mention those whose testimony seemed most important.
The ﬁrst of these was Captain Ransdell. He swore that
when William and Henry left Springﬁeld for home on
Tuesday before mentioned they did not take the direct
route, — which, you know, leads by the butcher shop, — but
that they followed the street north until they got opposite,
or nearly opposite, May’s new house, after which he could
not see them from where he stood; and it was afterwards
proved that in about an hour after they started, they came
into the street by the butcher shop from toward the
 brickyard. Dr. Merryman and others swore to what is stated
about the scuﬄe-ground, drag-trail, whiskers, and carriage
tracks. Henry was then introduced by the prosecution. He
swore that when they started for home they went out north,
as Ransdell stated, and turned down west by the brick-yard
into the woods, and there met Archibald; that they
proceeded a small distance farther, when he was placed as
a sentinel to watch for and announce the approach of any
one that might happen that way; that William and Arch.
took the dearborn out of the road a small distance to the
edge of the thicket, where they stopped, and he saw them
lift the body of a man into it; that they then moved oﬀ with
the carriage in the direction of Hickox’s mill, and he
loitered about for something like an hour, when William
returned with the carriage, but without Arch., and said they
had put him in a safe place; that they went somehow he did
not know exactly how — into the road close to the brewery,
and proceeded on to Clary’s Grove. He also stated that
some time during the day William told him that he and
Arch. had killed Fisher the evening before; that the way
they did it was by him William knocking him down with a
club, and Arch. then choking him to death.
An old man from Warren, called Dr. Gilmore, was then
introduced on the part of the defense. He swore that he had
known Fisher for several years; that Fisher had resided at
his house a long time at each of two diﬀerent spells — once
while he built a barn for him, and once while he was
doctored for some chronic disease; that two or three years
ago Fisher had a serious hurt in his head by the bursting of
 a gun, since which he had been subject to continued bad
health and occasional aberration of mind. He also stated
that on last Tuesday, being the same day that Maxcy
arrested William Trailor, he (the doctor) was from home in
the early part of the day, and on his return, about eleven
o’clock, found Fisher at his house in bed, and apparently
very unwell; that he asked him how he came from
Springﬁeld; that Fisher said he had come by Peoria, and
also told of several other places he had been at more in the
direction of Peoria, which showed that he at the time of
speaking did not know where he had been wandering about
in a state of derangement. He further stated that in about
two hours he received a note from one of Trailor’s friends,
advising him of his arrest, and requesting him to go on to
Springﬁeld as a witness, to testify as to the state of Fisher’s
health in former times; that he immediately set oﬀ, calling
up two of his neighbors as company, and, riding all evening
and all night, overtook Maxcy and William at Lewiston in
Fulton County; that Maxcy refusing to discharge Trailor
upon his statement, his two neighbors returned and he
came on to Springﬁeld. Some question being made as to
whether the doctor’s story was not a fabrication, several
acquaintances of his (among whom was the same
postmaster who wrote Keys, as before mentioned) were
introduced as sort of compurgators, who swore that they
knew the doctor to be of good character for truth and
veracity, and generally of good character in every way.
Here the testimony ended, and the Trailors were
discharged, Arch. and William expressing both in word and
 manner their entire conﬁdence that Fisher would be found
alive at the doctor’s by Galloway, Mallory, and Myers, who a
day before had been despatched for that purpose; which
Henry still protested that no power on earth could ever
show Fisher alive. Thus stands this curious aﬀair. When the
doctor’s story was ﬁrst made public, it was amusing to scan
and contemplate the countenances and hear the remarks of
those who had been actively in search for the dead body:
some looked quizzical, some melancholy, and some
furiously angry. Porter, who had been very active, swore he
always knew the man was not dead, and that he had not
stirred an inch to hunt for him; Langford, who had taken
the lead in cutting down Hickox’s mill-dam, and wanted to
hang Hickox for objecting, looked most awfully woebegone:
he seemed the “victim of unrequited aﬀection,” as
represented in the comic almanacs we used to laugh over;
and Hart, the little drayman that hauled Molly home once,
said it was too damned bad to have so much trouble, and no
hanging after all.
I commenced this letter on yesterday, since which I
received yours of the 13th. I stick to my promise to come to
Louisville. Nothing new here except what I have written. I
have not seen since my last trip, and I am going out there
as soon as I mail this letter.
Yours forever, LINCOLN.
   A  
 
  A 
  HA    
I  
.
June 25, 1841
IT HAVING BEEN charged in some of the public prints that
Harry Wilton, late United States marshal for the district of
Illinois, had used his oﬀice for political eﬀect, in the
appointment of deputies for the taking of the census for the
year 1840, we, the undersigned, were called upon by Mr.
Wilton to examine the papers in his possession relative to
these appointments, and to ascertain therefrom the
correctness 
or 
incorrectness 
of 
such 
charge. 
We
accompanied Mr. Wilton to a room, and examined the
matter as fully as we could with the means aﬀorded us. The
only sources of information bearing on the subject which
were submitted to us were the letters, etc., recommending
and opposing the various appointments made, and Mr.
Wilton’s verbal statements concerning the same. From
these letters, etc., it appears that in some instances
appointments 
were 
made 
in 
accordance 
with 
the
recommendations of leading Whigs, and in opposition to
those of leading Democrats; among which instances the
appointments at Scott, Wayne, Madison, and Lawrence are
the strongest. According to Mr. Wilton’s statement of the
seventy-six appointments we examined, ﬁfty-four were of
 Democrats, eleven of Whigs, and eleven of unknown
politics.
The chief ground of complaint against Mr. Wilton, as we
had understood it, was because of his appointment of so
many Democratic candidates for the Legislature, thus
giving them a decided advantage over their Whig
opponents; and consequently our attention was directed
rather particularly to that point. We found that there were
many such appointments, among which were those in
Tazewell, 
McLean, 
Iroquois, 
Coles, 
Menard, 
Wayne,
Washington, Fayette, etc.; and we did not learn that there
was one instance in which a Whig candidate for the
Legislature had been appointed. There was no written
evidence before us showing us at what time those
appointments were made; but Mr. Wilton stated that they
all with one exception were made before those appointed
became candidates for the Legislature, and the letters, etc.,
recommending them all bear date before, and most of them
long before, those appointed were publicly announced
candidates.
We give the foregoing naked facts and draw no
conclusions from them.
BEND. S. EDWARDS, A. LINCOLN.
  
 
I   
A       
 
   A  I A    A   
BLOOMINGTON, ILL., September 27, 1841.
MISS MARY SPEED, Louisville, Ky.
MY FRIEND: By the way, a ﬁne example was presented
on board the boat for contemplating the eﬀect of condition
upon human happiness. A gentleman had purchased twelve
negroes in diﬀerent parts of Kentucky, and was taking them
to a farm in the South. They were chained six and six
together. A small iron clevis was around the left wrist of
each, and this fastened to the main chain by a shorter one,
at a convenient distance from the others, so that the
negroes were strung together precisely like so many ﬁsh
upon a trotline. In this condition they were being separated
forever from the scenes of their childhood, their friends,
their fathers and mothers, and brothers and sisters, and
many of them from their wives and children, and going into
perpetual slavery where the lash of the master is
proverbially more ruthless and unrelenting than any other;
and yet amid all these distressing circumstances, as we
would think them, they were the most cheerful and
apparently happy creatures on board. One, whose oﬀence
for which he had been sold was an overfondness for his
wife, played the ﬁddle almost continually, and the others
danced, sang, cracked jokes, and played various games
 with cards from day to day. How true it is that ‘God
tempers the wind to the shorn lamb,’ or in other words,
that he renders the worst of human conditions tolerable,
while he permits the best to be nothing better than
tolerable. To return to the narrative: When we reached
Springﬁeld I stayed but one day, when I started on this
tedious circuit where I now am. Do you remember my going
to the city, while I was in Kentucky, to have a tooth
extracted, and making a failure of it? Well, that same old
tooth got to paining me so much that about a week since I
had it torn out, bringing with it a bit of the jawbone, the
consequence of which is that my mouth is now so sore that
I can neither talk nor eat.
Your sincere friend, A. LINCOLN.
