    
  
  
 H A  .     
 
 
 
A  IA
January 30, 1842.
MY DEAR SPEED: — Feeling, as you know I do, the
deepest solicitude for the success of the enterprise you are
engaged in, I adopt this as the last method I can adopt to
aid you, in case (which God forbid!) you shall need any aid.
I do not place what I am going to say on paper because I
can say it better that way than I could by word of mouth,
but, were I to say it orally before we part, most likely you
would forget it at the very time when it might do you some
good. As I think it reasonable that you will feel very badly
some time between this and the ﬁnal consummation of your
purpose, it is intended that you shall read this just at such a
time. Why I say it is reasonable that you will feel very badly
yet, is because of three special causes added to the general
one which I shall mention.
The general cause is, that you are naturally of a nervous
temperament; and this I say from what I have seen of you
personally, and what you have told me concerning your
mother at various times, and concerning your brother
William at the time his wife died. The ﬁrst special cause is
your exposure to bad weather on your journey, which my
experience clearly proves to be very severe on defective
nerves. The second is the absence of all business and
 conversation of friends, which might divert your mind, give
it occasional rest from the intensity of thought which will
sometimes wear the sweetest idea threadbare and turn it to
the bitterness of death. The third is the rapid and near
approach of that crisis on which all your thoughts and
feelings concentrate.
If from all these causes you shall escape and go through
triumphantly, without another “twinge of the soul,” I shall
be most happily but most egregiously deceived. If, on the
contrary, you shall, as I expect you will at sometime, be
agonized and distressed, let me, who have some reason to
speak with judgment on such a subject, beseech you to
ascribe it to the causes I have mentioned, and not to some
false and ruinous suggestion of the Devil.
“But,” you will say, “do not your causes apply to every
one engaged in a like undertaking?” By no means. The
particular causes, to a greater or less extent, perhaps do
apply in all cases; but the general one, — nervous debility,
which is the key and conductor of all the particular ones,
and without which they would be utterly harmless, —
though it does pertain to you, does not pertain to one in a
thousand. It is out of this that the painful diﬀerence
between you and the mass of the world springs.
I know what the painful point with you is at all times
when you are unhappy; it is an apprehension that you do
not love her as you should. What nonsense! How came you
to court her? Was it because you thought she deserved it,
and that you had given her reason to expect it? If it was for
that why did not the same reason make you court Ann
 Todd, and at least twenty others of whom you can think,
and to whom it would apply with greater force than to her?
Did you court her for her wealth? Why, you know she had
none. But you say you reasoned yourself into it. What do
you mean by that? Was it not that you found yourself
unable to reason yourself out of it? Did you not think, and
partly form the purpose, of courting her the ﬁrst time you
ever saw her or heard of her? What had reason to do with it
at that early stage? There was nothing at that time for
reason to work upon. Whether she was moral, amiable,
sensible, or even of good character, you did not, nor could
then know, except, perhaps, you might infer the last from
the company you found her in.
All you then did or could know of her was her personal
appearance and deportment; and these, if they impress at
all, impress the heart, and not the head.
Say candidly, were not those heavenly black eyes the
whole basis of all your early reasoning on the subject? After
you and I had once been at the residence, did you not go
and take me all the way to Lexington and back, for no other
purpose but to get to see her again, on our return on that
evening to take a trip for that express object? What earthly
consideration would you take to ﬁnd her scouting and
despising you, and giving herself up to another? But of this
you have no apprehension; and therefore you cannot bring
it home to your feelings.
I shall be so anxious about you that I shall want you to
write by every mail.
Your friend, LINCOLN.
  
  
 H A  .     
.
SPRINGFIELD, ILLINOIS, February 3, 1842.
DEAR SPEED: — Your letter of the 25th January came to
hand to-day. You well know that I do not feel my own
sorrows much more keenly than I do yours, when I know of
them; and yet I assure you I was not much hurt by what you
wrote me of your excessively bad feeling at the time you
wrote. Not that I am less capable of sympathizing with you
now than ever, not that I am less your friend than ever, but
because I hope and believe that your present anxiety and
distress about her health and her life must and will forever
banish those horrid doubts which I know you sometimes
felt as to the truth of your aﬀection for her. If they can once
and forever be removed (and I almost feel a presentiment
that the Almighty has sent your present aﬄiction expressly
for that object), surely nothing can come in their stead to
ﬁll their immeasurable measure of misery. The death-
scenes of those we love are surely painful enough; but
these we are prepared for and expect to see: they happen
to all, and all know they must happen. Painful as they are,
they are not an unlooked for sorrow. Should she, as you
fear, be destined to an early grave, it is indeed a great
consolation to know that she is so well prepared to meet it.
Her religion, which you once disliked so much, I will
 venture you now prize most highly. But I hope your
melancholy bodings as to her early death are not well
founded. I even hope that ere this reaches you she will have
returned with improved and still improving health, and that
you will have met her, and forgotten the sorrows of the past
in the enjoyments of the present. I would say more if I
could, but it seems that I have said enough. It really
appears to me that you yourself ought to rejoice, and not
sorrow, at this indubitable evidence of your undying
aﬀection for her. Why, Speed, if you did not love her
although you might not wish her death, you would most
certainly be resigned to it. Perhaps this point is no longer a
question with you, and my pertinacious dwelling upon it is
a rude intrusion upon your feelings. If so, you must pardon
me. You know the hell I have suﬀered on that point, and
how tender I am upon it. You know I do not mean wrong. I
have been quite clear of “hypo” since you left, even better
than I was along in the fall. I have seen but once. She
seemed very cheerful, and so I said nothing to her about
what we spoke of.
Old Uncle Billy Herndon is dead, and it is said this
evening that Uncle Ben Ferguson will not live. This, I
believe, is all the news, and enough at that unless it were
better. Write me immediately on the receipt of this.
Your friend, as ever, LINCOLN.
  
  
 H A  .     
 
 
 
      I
SPRINGFIELD, ILLINOIS, February 13, 1842.
DEAR SPEED: — Yours of the 1st instant came to hand
three or four days ago. When this shall reach you, you will
have been Fanny’s husband several days. You know my
desire to befriend you is everlasting; that I will never cease
while I know how to do anything. But you will always
hereafter be on ground that I have never occupied, and
consequently, if advice were needed, I might advise wrong.
I do fondly hope, however, that you will never again need
any comfort from abroad. But should I be mistaken in this,
should excessive pleasure still be accompanied with a
painful counterpart at times, still let me urge you, as I have
ever done, to remember, in the depth and even agony of
despondency, that very shortly you are to feel well again. I
am now fully convinced that you love her as ardently as you
are capable of loving. Your ever being happy in her
presence, and your intense anxiety about her health, if
there were nothing else, would place this beyond all
dispute in my mind. I incline to think it probable that your
nerves will fail you occasionally for a while; but once you
get them ﬁrmly guarded now that trouble is over forever. I
think, if I were you, in case my mind were not exactly right,
I would avoid being idle. I would immediately engage in
 some business, or go to making preparations for it, which
would be the same thing. If you went through the ceremony
calmly, or even with suﬀicient composure not to excite
alarm in any present, you are safe beyond question, and in
two or three months, to say the most, will be the happiest
of men.
I would desire you to give my particular respects to
Fanny; but perhaps you will not wish her to know you have
received this, lest she should desire to see it. Make her
write me an answer to my last letter to her; at any rate I
would set great value upon a note or letter from her. Write
me whenever you have leisure. Yours forever, A. LINCOLN.
P. S. — I have been quite a man since you left.
  
 
.  .  H     .
SPRINGFIELD, ILL., Feb. 16, 1842.
G. B. SHELEDY, ESQ.:
Yours of the 10th is duly received. Judge Logan and
myself are doing business together now, and we are willing
to attend to your cases as you propose. As to the terms, we
are willing to attend each case you prepare and send us for
 10 (when there shall be no opposition) to be sent in
advance, or you to know that it is safe. It takes  5.75 of
cost to start upon, that is,  1.75 to clerk, and  2 to each of
two publishers of papers. Judge Logan thinks it will take
the balance of  20 to carry a case through. This must be
advanced from time to time as the services are performed,
as the oﬀicers will not act without. I do not know whether
you can be admitted an attorney of the Federal court in
your absence or not; nor is it material, as the business can
be done in our names.
Thinking it may aid you a little, I send you one of our
blank forms of Petitions. It, you will see, is framed to be
sworn to before the Federal court clerk, and, in your cases,
will have [to] be so far changed as to be sworn to before
the clerk of your circuit court; and his certiﬁcate must be
accompanied with his oﬀicial seal. The schedules, too, must
be attended to. Be sure that they contain the creditors’
 names, their residences, the amounts due each, the
debtors’ names, their residences, and the amounts they
owe, also all property and where located.
Also be sure that the schedules are all signed by the
applicants as well as the Petition. Publication will have to
be made here in one paper, and in one nearest the
residence of the applicant. Write us in each case where the
last advertisement is to be sent, whether to you or to what
paper.
I believe I have now said everything that can be of any
advantage. Your friend as ever, A. LINCOLN.
  
 
 
 
   .  I      
 A
 I    
  
 H
February 22, 1842.
I NEVER ENCOURAGE deceit, and falsehood, especially if you
have got a bad memory, is the worst enemy a fellow can
have. The fact is truth is your truest friend, no matter what
the circumstances are. Notwithstanding this copy-book
preamble, my boy, I am inclined to suggest a little prudence
on your part. You see I have a congenital aversion to
failure, and the sudden announcement to your Uncle
Andrew of the success of your “lamp rubbing” might
possibly 
prevent 
your 
passing 
the 
severe 
physical
examination to which you will be subjected in order to
enter the Military Academy. You see I should like to have a
perfect soldier credited to dear old Illinois — no broken
bones, scalp wounds, etc. So I think it might be wise to
hand this letter from me in to your good uncle through his
room-window after he has had a comfortable dinner, and
watch its eﬀect from the top of the pigeon-house.
I have just told the folks here in Springﬁeld on this 111th
anniversary of the birth of him whose name, mightiest in
the cause of civil liberty, still mightiest in the cause of
moral reformation, we mention in solemn awe, in naked,
deathless splendor, that the one victory we can ever call
complete will be that one which proclaims that there is not
 one slave or one drunkard on the face of God’s green earth.
Recruit for this victory.
Now, boy, on your march, don’t you go and forget the old
maxim that “one drop of honey catches more ﬂies than a
half-gallon of gall.” Load your musket with this maxim, and
smoke it in your pipe.
 A
        
    H     I
 I  
A HI
 
IA
   
   A
    
 I   
FEBRUARY 22, 1842.
ALTHOUGH THE TEMPERANCE cause has been in progress
for near twenty years, it is apparent to all that it is just now
being 
crowned 
with 
a 
degree 
of 
success 
hitherto
unparalleled.
The list of its friends is daily swelled by the additions of
ﬁfties, of hundreds, and of thousands. The cause itself
seems suddenly transformed from a cold abstract theory to
a living, breathing, active, and powerful chieftain, going
forth “conquering and to conquer.” The citadels of his great
adversary are daily being stormed and dismantled; his
temple and his altars, where the rites of his idolatrous
worship have long been performed, and where human
sacriﬁces have long been wont to be made, are daily
desecrated and deserted. The triumph of the conqueror’s
fame is sounding from hill to hill, from sea to sea, and from
land to land, and calling millions to his standard at a blast.
For this new and splendid success we heartily rejoice.
That that success is so much greater now than heretofore is
doubtless owing to rational causes; and if we would have it
continue, we shall do well to inquire what those causes are.
 The warfare heretofore waged against the demon
intemperance has somehow or other been erroneous.
Either the champions engaged or the tactics they adopted
have not been the most proper. These champions for the
most part have been preachers, lawyers, and hired agents.
Between these and the mass of mankind there is a want of
approachability, if the term be admissible, partially, at least,
fatal to their success. They are supposed to have no
sympathy of feeling or interest with those very persons
whom it is their object to convince and persuade.
And again, it is so common and so easy to ascribe
motives to men of these classes other than those they
profess to act upon. The preacher, it is said, advocates
temperance because he is a fanatic, and desires a union of
the Church and State; the lawyer from his pride and vanity
of hearing himself speak; and the hired agent for his salary.
But when one who has long been known as a victim of
intemperance bursts the fetters that have bound him, and
appears before his neighbors “clothed and in his right
mind,” a redeemed specimen of long-lost humanity, and
stands up, with tears of joy trembling in his eyes, to tell of
the miseries once endured, now to be endured no more
forever; of his once naked and starving children, now clad
and fed comfortably; of a wife long weighed down with
woe, weeping, and a broken heart, now restored to health,
happiness, and a renewed aﬀection; and how easily it is all
done, once it is resolved to be done; how simple his
language! there is a logic and an eloquence in it that few
with human feelings can resist. They cannot say that he
 desires a union of Church and State, for he is not a church
member; they cannot say he is vain of hearing himself
speak, for his whole demeanor shows he would gladly avoid
speaking at all; they cannot say he speaks for pay, for he
receives none, and asks for none. Nor can his sincerity in
any way be doubted, or his sympathy for those he would
persuade to imitate his example be denied.
In my judgment, it is to the battles of this new class of
champions that our late success is greatly, perhaps chieﬂy,
owing. But, had the old-school champions themselves been
of the most wise selecting, was their system of tactics the
most judicious? It seems to me it was not. Too much
denunciation against dram-sellers and dram-drinkers was
indulged in. This I think was both impolitic and unjust. It
was impolitic, because it is not much in the nature of man
to be driven to anything; still less to be driven about that
which is exclusively his own business; and least of all where
such driving is to be submitted to at the expense of
pecuniary interest or burning appetite. When the dram-
seller and drinker were incessantly told not in accents of
entreaty and persuasion, diﬀidently addressed by erring
man to an erring brother, but in the thundering tones of
anathema and denunciation with which the lordly judge
often groups together all the crimes of the felon’s life, and
thrusts them in his face just ere he passes sentence of
death upon him that they were the authors of all the vice
and misery and crime in the land; that they were the
manufacturers and material of all the thieves and robbers
and murderers that infest the earth; that their houses were
 the workshops of the devil; and that their persons should
be shunned by all the good and virtuous, as moral
pestilences — I say, when they were told all this, and in this
way, it is not wonderful that they were slow to acknowledge
the truth of such denunciations, and to join the ranks of
their denouncers in a hue and cry against themselves.
To have expected them to do otherwise than they did to
have expected them not to meet denunciation with
denunciation, crimination with crimination, and anathema
with anathema — was to expect a reversal of human
nature, which is God’s decree and can never be reversed.
When the conduct of men is designed to be inﬂuenced,
persuasion, kind, unassuming persuasion, should ever be
adopted. It is an old and a true maxim that “a drop of honey
catches more ﬂies than a gallon of gall.” So with men. If
you would win a man to your cause, ﬁrst convince him that
you are his sincere friend. Therein is a drop of honey that
catches his heart, which, say what he will, is the great
highroad to his reason; and which, when once gained, you
will ﬁnd but little trouble in convincing his judgment of the
justice of your cause, if indeed that cause really be a just
one. On the contrary, assume to dictate to his judgment, or
to command his action, or to mark him as one to be
shunned and despised, and he will retreat within himself,
close all the avenues to his head and his heart; and though
your cause be naked truth itself, transformed to the
heaviest lance, harder than steel, and sharper than steel
can be made, and though you throw it with more than
herculean force and precision, you shall be no more able to
 pierce him than to penetrate the hard shell of a tortoise
with a rye straw. Such is man, and so must he be
understood by those who would lead him, even to his own
best interests.
On this point the Washingtonians greatly excel the
temperance advocates of former times. Those whom they
desire to convince and persuade are their old friends and
companions. They know they are not demons, nor even the
worst of men; they know that generally they are kind,
generous, and charitable even beyond the example of their
more staid and sober neighbors. They are practical
philanthropists; and they glow with a generous and
brotherly zeal that mere theorizers are incapable of feeling.
Benevolence and charity possess their hearts entirely; and
out of the abundance of their hearts their tongues give
utterance; “love through all their actions runs, and all their
words are mild.” In this spirit they speak and act, and in
the same they are heard and regarded. And when such is
the temper of the advocate, and such of the audience, no
good cause can be unsuccessful. But I have said that
denunciations against dramsellers and dram-drinkers are
unjust, as well as impolitic. Let us see. I have not inquired
at what period of time the use of intoxicating liquors
commenced; nor is it important to know. It is suﬀicient that,
to all of us who now inhabit the world, the practice of
drinking them is just as old as the world itself that is, we
have seen the one just as long as we have seen the other.
When all such of us as have now reached the years of
maturity ﬁrst opened our eyes upon the stage of existence,
 we found intoxicating liquor recognized by everybody, used
by everybody, repudiated by nobody. It commonly entered
into the ﬁrst draught of the infant and the last draught of
the dying man. From the sideboard of the parson down to
the ragged pocket of the houseless loafer, it was constantly
found. Physicians proscribed it in this, that, and the other
disease; government provided it for soldiers and sailors;
and to have a rolling or raising, a husking or “hoedown,”
anywhere about without it was positively insuﬀerable. So,
too, it was everywhere a respectable article of manufacture
and merchandise. The making of it was regarded as an
honorable livelihood, and he who could make most was the
most enterprising and respectable. Large and small
manufactories of it were everywhere erected, in which all
the earthly goods of their owners were invested. Wagons
drew it from town to town; boats bore it from clime to
clime, and the winds wafted it from nation to nation; and
merchants bought and sold it, by wholesale and retail, with
precisely the same feelings on the part of the seller, buyer,
and bystander as are felt at the selling and buying of
ploughs, beef, bacon, or any other of the real necessaries of
life. Universal public opinion not only tolerated but
recognized and adopted its use.
It is true that even then it was known and acknowledged
that many were greatly injured by it; but none seemed to
think the injury arose from the use of a bad thing, but from
the abuse of a very good thing. The victims of it were to be
pitied and compassionated, just as are the heirs of
consumption and other hereditary diseases. Their failing
 was treated as a misfortune, and not as a crime, or even as
a disgrace. If, then, what I have been saying is true, is it
wonderful that some should think and act now as all
thought and acted twenty years ago? and is it just to assail,
condemn, or despise them for doing so? The universal
sense of mankind on any subject is an argument, or at least
an inﬂuence, not easily overcome. The success of the
argument in favor of the existence of an overruling
Providence mainly depends upon that sense; and men
ought not in justice to be denounced for yielding to it in any
case, or giving it up slowly, especially when they are
backed by interest, ﬁxed habits, or burning appetites.
Another error, as it seems to me, into which the old
reformers fell, was the position that all habitual drunkards
were utterly incorrigible, and therefore must be turned
adrift and damned without remedy in order that the grace
of temperance might abound, to the temperate then, and to
all mankind some hundreds of years thereafter. There is in
this some thing so repugnant to humanity, so uncharitable,
so cold-blooded and feelingless, that it, never did nor ever
can enlist the enthusiasm of a popular cause. We could not
love the man who taught it we could not hear him with
patience. The heart could not throw open its portals to it,
the generous man could not adopt it — it could not mix with
his blood. It looked so ﬁendishly selﬁsh, so like throwing
fathers and brothers overboard to lighten the boat for our
security, that the noble-minded shrank from the manifest
meanness of the thing. And besides this, the beneﬁts of a
reformation to be eﬀected by such a system were too
 remote in point of time to warmly engage many in its
behalf. Few can be induced to labor exclusively for
posterity, and none will do it enthusiastically. — Posterity
has done nothing for us; and, theorize on it as we may,
practically we shall do very little for it, unless we are made
to think we are at the same time doing something for
ourselves.
What an ignorance of human nature does it exhibit to ask
or to expect a whole community to rise up and labor for the
temporal happiness of others, after themselves shall be
consigned to the dust, a majority of which community take
no pains whatever to secure their own eternal welfare at no
more distant day! Great distance in either time or space
has wonderful power to lull and render quiescent the
human mind. Pleasures to be enjoyed, or pains to be
endured, after we shall be dead and gone are but little
regarded even in our own cases, and much less in the cases
of others. Still, in addition to this there is something so
ludicrous in promises of good or threats of evil a great way
oﬀ as to render the whole subject with which they are
connected easily turned into ridicule. “Better lay down that
spade you are stealing, Paddy; if you don’t you’ll pay for it
at the day of judgment.” “Be the powers, if ye’ll credit me
so long I’ll take another jist.”
By the Washingtonians this system of consigning the
habitual drunkard to hopeless ruin is repudiated. They
adopt a more enlarged philanthropy; they go for present as
well as future good. They labor for all now living, as well as
hereafter to live. They teach hope to all-despair to none. As
 applying to their cause, they deny the doctrine of
unpardonable sin; as in Christianity it is taught, so in this
they teach— “While — While the lamp holds out to burn,
The vilest sinner may return.” And, what is a matter of
more profound congratulation, they, by experiment upon
experiment and example upon example, prove the maxim to
be no less true in the one case than in the other. On every
hand we behold those who but yesterday were the chief of
sinners, now the chief apostles of the cause. Drunken devils
are cast out by ones, by sevens, by legions; and their
unfortunate victims, like the poor possessed who were
redeemed from their long and lonely wanderings in the
tombs, are publishing to the ends of the earth how great
things have been done for them.
To these new champions and this new system of tactics
our late success is mainly owing, and to them we must
mainly look for the ﬁnal consummation. The ball is now
rolling gloriously on, and none are so able as they to
increase its speed and its bulk, to add to its momentum and
its magnitude — even though unlearned in letters, for this
task none are so well educated. To ﬁt them for this work
they have been taught in the true school. They have been in
that gulf from which they would teach others the means of
escape. They have passed that prison wall which others
have long declared impassable; and who that has not shall
dare to weigh opinions with them as to the mode of
passing?
But if it be true, as I have insisted, that those who have
suﬀered by intemperance personally, and have reformed,
 are the most powerful and eﬀicient instruments to push the
reformation to ultimate success, it does not follow that
those who have not suﬀered have no part left them to
perform. Whether or not the world would be vastly
beneﬁted by a total and ﬁnal banishment from it of all
intoxicating drinks seems to me not now an open question.
Three fourths of mankind confess the aﬀirmative with their
tongues, and, I believe, all the rest acknowledge it in their
hearts.
Ought any, then, to refuse their aid in doing what good
the good of the whole demands? Shall he who cannot do
much be for that reason excused if he do nothing? “But,”
says one, “what good can I do by signing the pledge? I
never drank, even without signing.” This question has
already been asked and answered more than a million of
times. Let it be answered once more. For the man suddenly
or in any other way to break oﬀ from the use of drams, who
has indulged in them for a long course of years and until
his appetite for them has grown ten or a hundredfold
stronger and more craving than any natural appetite can
be, requires a most powerful moral eﬀort. In such an
undertaking he needs every moral support and inﬂuence
that can possibly be brought to his aid and thrown around
him. And not only so, but every moral prop should be taken
from whatever argument might rise in his mind to lure him
to his backsliding. When he casts his eyes around him, he
should be able to see all that he respects, all that he
admires, all that he loves, kindly and anxiously pointing him
 onward, and none beckoning him back to his former
miserable “wallowing in the mire.”
But it is said by some that men will think and act for
themselves; that none will disuse spirits or anything else
because his neighbors do; and that moral inﬂuence is not
that powerful engine contended for. Let us examine this.
Let me ask the man who could maintain this position most
stiﬄy, what compensation he will accept to go to church
some Sunday and sit during the sermon with his wife’s
bonnet upon his head? Not a triﬂe, I’ll venture. And why
not? There would be nothing irreligious in it, nothing
immoral, nothing uncomfortable — then why not? Is it not
because 
there 
would 
be 
something 
egregiously
unfashionable in it? Then it is the inﬂuence of fashion; and
what is the inﬂuence of fashion but the inﬂuence that other
people’s actions have on our actions — the strong
inclination each of us feels to do as we see all our
neighbors do? Nor is the inﬂuence of fashion conﬁned to
any particular thing or class of things; it is just as strong on
one subject as another. Let us make it as unfashionable to
withhold our names from the temperance cause as for
husbands to wear their wives’ bonnets to church, and
instances will be just as rare in the one case as the other.
“But,” say some, “we are no drunkards, and we shall not
acknowledge 
ourselves 
such 
by 
joining 
a 
reformed
drunkard’s society, whatever our inﬂuence might be.”
Surely no Christian will adhere to this objection. If they
believe as they profess, that Omnipotence condescended to
take on himself the form of sinful man, and as such to die
 an ignominious death for their sakes, surely they will not
refuse submission to the inﬁnitely lesser condescension, for
the temporal, and perhaps eternal, salvation of a large,
erring, and unfortunate class of their fellow-creatures. Nor
is the condescension very great. In my judgment such of us
as have never fallen victims have been spared more by the
absence of appetite than from any mental or moral
superiority over those who have. Indeed, I believe if we
take habitual drunkards as a class, their heads and their
hearts will bear an advantageous comparison with those of
any other class. There seems ever to have been a
proneness in the brilliant and warm-blooded to fall into this
vice — the demon of intemperance ever seems to have
delighted in sucking the blood of genius and of generosity.
What one of us but can call to mind some relative, more
promising in youth than all his fellows, who has fallen a
sacriﬁce to his rapacity? He ever seems to have gone forth
like the Egyptian angel of death, commissioned to slay, if
not the ﬁrst, the fairest born of every family. Shall he now
be arrested in his desolating career? In that arrest all can
give aid that will; and who shall be excused that can and
will not? Far around as human breath has ever blown he
keeps our fathers, our brothers, our sons, and our friends
prostrate in the chains of moral death. To all the living
everywhere we cry, “Come sound the moral trump, that
these may rise and stand up an exceeding great army.”
“Come from the four winds, O breath! and breathe upon
these slain that they may live.” If the relative grandeur of
revolutions shall be estimated by the great amount of
 human misery they alleviate, and the small amount they
inﬂict, then indeed will this be the grandest the world shall
ever have seen.
Of our political revolution of ‘76 we are all justly proud.
It has given us a degree of political freedom far exceeding
that of any other nation of the earth. In it the world has
found a solution of the long-mooted problem as to the
capability of man to govern himself. In it was the germ
which has vegetated, and still is to grow and expand into
the universal liberty of mankind. But, with all these
glorious results, past, present, and to come, it had its evils
too. It breathed forth famine, swam in blood, and rode in
ﬁre; and long, long after, the orphan’s cry and the widow’s
wail continued to break the sad silence that ensued. These
were the price, the inevitable price, paid for the blessings it
bought.
Turn now to the temperance revolution. In it we shall
ﬁnd 
a 
stronger 
bondage 
broken, 
a 
viler 
slavery
manumitted, a greater tyrant deposed; in it, more of want
supplied, more disease healed, more sorrow assuaged. By it
no Orphans starving, no widows weeping. By it none
wounded in feeling, none injured in interest; even the
drammaker and dram-seller will have glided into other
occupations so gradually as never to have felt the change,
and will stand ready to join all others in the universal song
of gladness. And what a noble ally this to the cause of
political freedom, with such an aid its march cannot fail to
be on and on, till every son of earth shall drink in rich
fruition the sorrow-quenching draughts of perfect liberty.
 Happy day when-all appetites controlled, all poisons
subdued, all matter subjected-mind, all-conquering mind,
shall live and move, the monarch of the world. Glorious
consummation! Hail, fall of fury! Reign of reason, all hail!
And when the victory shall be complete, when there shall
be neither a slave nor a drunkard on the earth, how proud
the title of that land which may truly claim to be the
birthplace and the cradle of both those revolutions that
shall have ended in that victory. How nobly distinguished
that people who shall have planted and nurtured to
maturity both the political and moral freedom of their
species.
This is the one hundred and tenth anniversary of the
birthday of Washington; we are met to celebrate this day.
Washington is the mightiest name of earth long since
mightiest in the cause of civil liberty, still mightiest in
moral reformation. On that name no eulogy is expected. It
cannot be. To add brightness to the sun or glory to the
name of Washington is alike impossible. Let none attempt
it. In solemn awe pronounce the name, and in its naked
deathless splendor leave it shining on.
  
  
 H A  .     
.
SPRINGFIELD, February 25, 1842.
DEAR SPEED: — Yours of the 16th instant, announcing
that Miss Fanny and you are “no more twain, but one
ﬂesh,” reached me this morning. I have no way of telling
you how much happiness I wish you both, though I believe
you both can conceive it. I feel somewhat jealous of both of
you now: you will be so exclusively concerned for one
another, that I shall be forgotten entirely. My acquaintance
with Miss Fanny (I call her this, lest you should think I am
speaking of your mother) was too short for me to
reasonably hope to long be remembered by her; and still I
am sure I shall not forget her soon. Try if you cannot
remind her of that debt she owes me — and be sure you do
not interfere to prevent her paying it.
I regret to learn that you have resolved to not return to
Illinois. I shall be very lonesome without you. How
miserably things seem to be arranged in this world! If we
have no friends, we have no pleasure; and if we have them,
we are sure to lose them, and be doubly pained by the loss.
I did hope she and you would make your home here; but I
own I have no right to insist. You owe obligations to her ten
thousand times more sacred than you can owe to others,
and in that light let them be respected and observed. It is
 natural that she should desire to remain with her relatives
and friends. As to friends, however, she could not need
them anywhere: she would have them in abundance here.
Give my kind remembrance to Mr. Williamson and his
family, particularly Miss Elizabeth; also to your mother,
brother, and sisters. Ask little Eliza Davis if she will ride to
town with me if I come there again. And ﬁnally, give Fanny
a double reciprocation of all the love she sent me. Write me
often, and believe me
Yours forever, LINCOLN.
P. S. Poor Easthouse is gone at last. He died awhile
before day this morning. They say he was very loath to
die....
L.
  
  
 H A  .     
 
 
 
A  IA
 
   
SPRINGFIELD, February 25,1842.
DEAR SPEED: — I received yours of the 12th written the
day you went down to William’s place, some days since, but
delayed answering it till I should receive the promised one
of the 16th, which came last night. I opened the letter with
intense anxiety and trepidation; so much so, that, although
it turned out better than I expected, I have hardly yet, at a
distance of ten hours, become calm.
I tell you, Speed, our forebodings (for which you and I
are peculiar) are all the worst sort of nonsense. I fancied,
from the time I received your letter of Saturday, that the
one of Wednesday was never to come, and yet it did come,
and what is more, it is perfectly clear, both from its tone
and handwriting, that you were much happier, or, if you
think the term preferable, less miserable, when you wrote
it than when you wrote the last one before. You had so
obviously improved at the very time I so much fancied you
would have grown worse. You say that something
indescribably horrible and alarming still haunts you. You
will not say that three months from now, I will venture.
When your nerves once get steady now, the whole trouble
will be over forever. Nor should you become impatient at
 their being even very slow in becoming steady. Again you
say, you much fear that that Elysium of which you have
dreamed so much is never to be realized. Well, if it shall
not, I dare swear it will not be the fault of her who is now
your wife. I now have no doubt that it is the peculiar
misfortune of both you and me to dream dreams of Elysium
far exceeding all that anything earthly can realize. Far
short of your dreams as you may be, no woman could do
more to realize them than that same black-eyed Fanny. If
you could but contemplate her through my imagination, it
would appear ridiculous to you that any one should for a
moment think of being unhappy with her. My old father
used to have a saying that “If you make a bad bargain, hug
it all the tighter”; and it occurs to me that if the bargain
you have just closed can possibly be called a bad one, it is
certainly the most pleasant one for applying that maxim to
which my fancy can by any eﬀort picture.
I write another letter, enclosing this, which you can show
her, if she desires it. I do this because she would think
strangely, perhaps, should you tell her that you received no
letters from me, or, telling her you do, refuse to let her see
them. I close this, entertaining the conﬁdent hope that
every successive letter I shall have from you (which I here
pray may not be few, nor far between) may show you
possessing a more steady hand and cheerful heart than the
last preceding it. As ever, your friend, LINCOLN.
  
  
 H A  .     
.
SPRINGFIELD, March 27, 1842
DEAR SPEED: — Yours of the 10th instant was received
three or four days since. You know I am sincere when I tell
you the pleasure its contents gave me was, and is,
inexpressible. As to your farm matter, I have no sympathy
with you. I have no farm, nor ever expect to have, and
consequently have not studied the subject enough to be
much interested with it. I can only say that I am glad you
are satisﬁed and pleased with it. But on that other subject,
to me of the most intense interest whether in joy or sorrow,
I never had the power to withhold my sympathy from you.
It cannot be told how it now thrills me with joy to hear you
say you are “far happier than you ever expected to be.”
That much I know is enough. I know you too well to
suppose your expectations were not, at least, sometimes
extravagant, and if the reality exceeds them all, I say,
Enough, dear Lord. I am not going beyond the truth when I
tell you that the short space it took me to read your last
letter gave me more pleasure than the total sum of all I
have enjoyed since the fatal 1st of January, 1841. Since
then it seems to me I should have been entirely happy, but
for the never-absent idea that there is one still unhappy
whom I have contributed to make so. That still kills my
 soul. I cannot but reproach myself for even wishing to be
happy while she is otherwise. She accompanied a large
party on the railroad cars to Jacksonville last Monday, and
on her return spoke, so that I heard of it, of having enjoyed
the trip exceedingly. God be praised for that.
You know with what sleepless vigilance I have watched
you ever since the commencement of your aﬀair; and
although I am almost conﬁdent it is useless, I cannot
forbear once more to say that I think it is even yet possible
for your spirits to ﬂag down and leave you miserable. If
they should, don’t fail to remember that they cannot long
remain so. One thing I can tell you which I know you will be
glad to hear, and that is that I have seen — and scrutinized
her feelings as well as I could, and am fully convinced she
is far happier now than she has been for the last ﬁfteen
months past.
You will see by the last Sangamon Journal, that I made a
temperance speech on the 22d of February, which I claim
that Fanny and you shall read as an act of charity to me; for
I cannot learn that anybody else has read it, or is likely to.
Fortunately it is not very long, and I shall deem it a
suﬀicient compliance with my request if one of you listens
while the other reads it.
As to your Lockridge matter, it is only necessary to say
that there has been no court since you left, and that the
next commences to-morrow morning, during which I
suppose we cannot fail to get a judgment.
I wish you would learn of Everett what he would take,
over and above a discharge for all the trouble we have been
 at, to take his business out of our hands and give it to
somebody else. It is impossible to collect money on that or
any other claim here now; and although you know I am not
a very petulant man, I declare I am almost out of patience
with Mr. Everett’s importunity. It seems like he not only
writes all the letters he can himself, but gets everybody
else in Louisville and vicinity to be constantly writing to us
about his claim. I have always said that Mr. Everett is a
very clever fellow, and I am very sorry he cannot be
obliged; but it does seem to me he ought to know we are
interested to collect his claim, and therefore would do it if
we could.
I am neither joking nor in a pet when I say we would
thank him to transfer his business to some other, without
any compensation for what we have done, provided he will
see the court cost paid, for which we are security.
The sweet violet you inclosed came safely to hand, but it
was so dry, and mashed so ﬂat, that it crumbled to dust at
the ﬁrst attempt to handle it. The juice that mashed out of
it stained a place in the letter, which I mean to preserve
and cherish for the sake of her who procured it to be sent.
My renewed good wishes to her in particular, and generally
to all such of your relations who know me.
As ever,
LINCOLN.
  
  
 H A  .     
.
SPRINGFIELD, ILLINOIS, July 4, 1842.
DEAR SPEED: — Yours of the 16th June was received
only a day or two since. It was not mailed at Louisville till
the 25th. You speak of the great time that has elapsed since
I wrote you. Let me explain that. Your letter reached here a
day or two after I started on the circuit. I was gone ﬁve or
six weeks, so that I got the letters only a few weeks before
Butler started to your country. I thought it scarcely worth
while to write you the news which he could and would tell
you more in detail. On his return he told me you would
write me soon, and so I waited for your letter. As to my
having been displeased with your advice, surely you know
better than that. I know you do, and therefore will not labor
to convince you. True, that subject is painful to me; but it is
not your silence, or the silence of all the world, that can
make me forget it. I acknowledge the correctness of your
advice too; but before I resolve to do the one thing or the
other, I must gain my conﬁdence in my own ability to keep
my resolves when they are made. In that ability you know I
once prided myself as the only or chief gem of my
character; that gem I lost — how and where you know too
well. I have not yet regained it; and until I do, I cannot trust
myself in any matter of much importance. I believe now
 that had you understood my case at the time as well as I
understand yours afterward, by the aid you would have
given me I should have sailed through clear, but that does
not now aﬀord me suﬀicient conﬁdence to begin that or the
like of that again.
You make a kind acknowledgment of your obligations to
me for your present happiness. I am pleased with that
acknowledgment. But a thousand times more am I pleased
to know that you enjoy a degree of happiness worthy of an
acknowledgment. The truth is, I am not sure that there was
any merit with me in the part I took in your diﬀiculty; I was
drawn to it by a fate. If I would I could not have done less
than I did. I always was superstitious; I believe God made
me one of the instruments of bringing your Fanny and you
together, which union I have no doubt He had fore-
ordained. Whatever He designs He will do for me yet.
“Stand still, and see the salvation of the Lord” is my text
just now. If, as you say, you have told Fanny all, I should
have no objection to her seeing this letter, but for its
reference to our friend here: let her seeing it depend upon
whether she has ever known anything of my aﬀairs; and if
she has not, do not let her.
I do not think I can come to Kentucky this season. I am so
poor and make so little headway in the world, that I drop
back in a month of idleness as much as I gain in a year’s
sowing. I should like to visit you again. I should like to see
that “sis” of yours that was absent when I was there,
though I suppose she would run away again if she were to
hear I was coming.
 My respects and esteem to all your friends there, and, by
your permission, my love to your Fanny.
Ever yours, LINCOLN.
 A          
  H   
    
 HI 
ARTICLE WRITTEN BY Lincoln for the Sangamon Journal in
ridicule of James Shields, who, as State Auditor, had
declined to receive State Bank notes in payment of taxes.
The above letter purported to come from a poor widow
who, though supplied with State Bank paper, could not
obtain a receipt for her tax bill. This, and another
subsequent letter by Mary Todd, brought about the
“Lincoln-Shields Duel.”
  
    
 HI 
August 27, 1842.
DEAR MR. PRINTER:
I see you printed that long letter I sent you a spell ago. I
‘m quite encouraged by it, and can’t keep from writing
again. I think the printing of my letters will be a good thing
all round — it will give me the beneﬁt of being known by
the world, and give the world the advantage of knowing
what’s going on in the Lost Townships, and give your paper
respectability besides. So here comes another. Yesterday
afternoon I hurried through cleaning up the dinner dishes
and stepped over to neighbor S —— — to see if his wife
Peggy was as well as mout be expected, and hear what they
called the baby. Well, when I got there and just turned
round the corner of his log cabin, there he was, setting on
the doorstep reading a newspaper. “How are you, Jeﬀ?”
says I. He sorter started when he heard me, for he hadn’t
seen me before. “Why,” says he, “I ‘m mad as the devil,
Aunt ‘Becca!” “What about?” says I; “ain’t its hair the right
color? None of that nonsense, Jeﬀ; there ain’t an honester
woman in the Lost Townships than...”— “Than who?” says
he; “what the mischief are you about?” I began to see I was
running the wrong trail, and so says I, “Oh! nothing: I
 guess I was mistaken a little, that’s all. But what is it you
‘re mad about?”
“Why,” says he, “I’ve been tugging ever since harvest,
getting out wheat and hauling it to the river to raise State
Bank paper enough to pay my tax this year and a little
school debt I owe; and now, just as I ‘ve got it, here I open
this infernal Extra Register, expecting to ﬁnd it full of
‘Glorious Democratic Victories’ and ‘High Comb’d Cocks,’
when, lo and behold! I ﬁnd a set of fellows, calling
themselves oﬀicers of the State, have forbidden the tax
collectors, and school commissioners to receive State paper
at all; and so here it is dead on my hands. I don’t now
believe all the plunder I’ve got will fetch ready cash enough
to pay my taxes and that school debt.”
I was a good deal thunderstruck myself; for that was the
ﬁrst I had heard of the proclamation, and my old man was
pretty much in the same ﬁx with Jeﬀ. We both stood a
moment staring at one another without knowing what to
say. At last says I, “Mr. S —— — let me look at that paper.”
He handed it to me, when I read the proclamation over.
“There now,” says he, “did you ever see such a piece of
impudence and imposition as that?” I saw Jeﬀ was in a good
tune for saying some ill-natured things, and so I tho’t I
would just argue a little on the contrary side, and make him
rant a spell if I could. “Why,” says I, looking as digniﬁed
and thoughtful as I could, “it seems pretty tough, to be
sure, to have to raise silver where there’s none to be
raised; but then, you see, ‘there will be danger of loss’ if it
ain’t done.”
 “Loss! damnation!” says he. “I defy Daniel Webster, I
defy King Solomon, I defy the world — I defy — I defy —
yes, I defy even you, Aunt ‘Becca, to show how the people
can lose anything by paying their taxes in State paper.”
“Well,” says I, “you see what the oﬀicers of State say
about it, and they are a desarnin’ set of men. But,” says I, “I
guess you ‘re mistaken about what the proclamation says.
It don’t say the people will lose anything by the paper
money being taken for taxes. It only says ‘there will be
danger of loss’; and though it is tolerable plain that the
people can’t lose by paying their taxes in something they
can get easier than silver, instead of having to pay silver;
and though it’s just as plain that the State can’t lose by
taking State Bank paper, however low it may be, while she
owes the bank more than the whole revenue, and can pay
that paper over on her debt, dollar for dollar; — still there
is danger of loss to the ‘oﬀicers of State’; and you know,
Jeﬀ, we can’t get along without oﬀicers of State.”
“Damn oﬀicers of State!” says he; “that’s what Whigs are
always hurrahing for.”
“Now, don’t swear so, Jeﬀ,” says I, “you know I belong to
the meetin’, and swearin’ hurts my feelings.”
“Beg pardon, Aunt ‘Becca,” says he; “but I do say it’s
enough to make Dr. Goddard swear, to have tax to pay in
silver, for nothing only that Ford may get his two thousand
a year, and Shields his twenty-four hundred a year, and
Carpenter his sixteen hundred a year, and all without
‘danger of loss’ by taking it in State paper. Yes, yes: it’s
plain enough now what these oﬀicers of State mean by
 ‘danger of loss.’ Wash, I s’pose, actually lost ﬁfteen
hundred dollars out of the three thousand that two of these
‘oﬀicers of State’ let him steal from the treasury, by being
compelled to take it in State paper. Wonder if we don’t have
a proclamation before long, commanding us to make up
this loss to Wash in silver.”
And so he went on till his breath run out, and he had to
stop. I couldn’t think of anything to say just then, and so I
begun to look over the paper again. “Ay! here’s another
proclamation, or something like it.”
“Another?” says Jeﬀ; “and whose egg is it, pray?”
I looked to the bottom of it, and read aloud, “Your
obedient servant, James Shields, Auditor.”
“Aha!” says Jeﬀ, “one of them same three fellows again.
Well read it, and let’s hear what of it.”
I read on till I came to where it says, “The object of this
measure is to suspend the collection of the revenue for the
current year.”
“Now stop, now stop!” says he; “that’s a lie a’ready, and I
don’t want to hear of it.”
“Oh, maybe not,” says I.
“I say it-is-a-lie. Suspend the collection, indeed! Will the
collectors, that have taken their oaths to make the
collection, dare to end it? Is there anything in law requiring
them to perjure themselves at the bidding of James
Shields?
“Will the greedy gullet of the penitentiary be satisﬁed
with swallowing him instead of all of them, if they should
venture to obey him? And would he not discover some
 ‘danger of loss,’ and be oﬀ about the time it came to taking
their places?
“And suppose the people attempt to suspend, by refusing
to pay; what then? The collectors would just jerk up their
horses and cows, and the like, and sell them to the highest
bidder for silver in hand, without valuation or redemption.
Why, Shields didn’t believe that story himself; it was never
meant for the truth. If it was true, why was it not writ till
ﬁve days after the proclamation? Why did n’t Carlin and
Carpenter sign it as well as Shields? Answer me that, Aunt
‘Becca. I say it’s a lie, and not a well told one at that. It
grins out like a copper dollar. Shields is a fool as well as a
liar. With him truth is out of the question; and as for getting
a good, bright, passable lie out of him, you might as well try
to strike ﬁre from a cake of tallow. I stick to it, it’s all an
infernal Whig lie!”
“A Whig lie! Highty tighty!”
“Yes, a Whig lie; and it’s just like everything the cursed
British Whigs do. First they’ll do some divilment, and then
they’ll tell a lie to hide it. And they don’t care how plain a
lie it is; they think they can cram any sort of a one down
the throats of the ignorant Locofocos, as they call the
Democrats.”
“Why, Jeﬀ, you ‘re crazy: you don’t mean to say Shields is
a Whig!”
“Yes, I do.”
“Why, look here! the proclamation is in your own
Democratic paper, as you call it.”
 “I know it; and what of that? They only printed it to let us
Democrats see the deviltry the Whigs are at.”
“Well, but Shields is the auditor of this Loco — I mean
this Democratic State.”
“So he is, and Tyler appointed him to oﬀice.”
“Tyler appointed him?”
“Yes (if you must chaw it over), Tyler appointed him; or, if
it was n’t him, it was old Granny Harrison, and that’s all
one. I tell you, Aunt ‘Becca, there’s no mistake about his
being a Whig. Why, his very looks shows it; everything
about him shows it: if I was deaf and blind, I could tell him
by the smell. I seed him when I was down in Springﬁeld
last winter. They had a sort of a gatherin’ there one night
among the grandees, they called a fair. All the gals about
town was there, and all the handsome widows and married
women, ﬁnickin’ about trying to look like gals, tied as tight
in the middle, and puﬀed out at both ends, like bundles of
fodder that had n’t been stacked yet, but wanted stackin’
pretty bad. And then they had tables all around the house
kivered over with [ —— — ] caps and pincushions and ten
thousand such little knick-knacks, tryin’ to sell ’em to the
fellows that were bowin’, and scrapin’ and kungeerin’
about ’em. They would n’t let no Democrats in, for fear
they’d disgust the ladies, or scare the little gals, or dirty
the ﬂoor. I looked in at the window, and there was this
same fellow Shields ﬂoatin’ about on the air, without heft or
earthly substances, just like a lock of cat fur where cats had
been ﬁghting.
 “He was paying his money to this one, and that one, and
t’ other one, and suﬀerin’ great loss because it was n’t
silver instead of State paper; and the sweet distress he
seemed to be in, — his very features, in the ecstatic agony
of his soul, spoke audibly and distinctly, ‘Dear girls, it is
distressing, but I cannot marry you all. Too well I know how
much you suﬀer; but do, do remember, it is not my fault
that I am so handsome and so interesting.’
“As this last was expressed by a most exquisite
contortion of his face, he seized hold of one of their hands,
and squeezed, and held on to it about a quarter of an hour.
‘Oh, my good fellow!’ says I to myself, ‘if that was one of
our Democratic gals in the Lost Townships, the way you ‘d
get a brass pin let into you would be about up to the head.’
He a Democrat! Fiddlesticks! I tell you, Aunt ‘Becca, he’s a
Whig, and no mistake; nobody but a Whig could make such
a conceity dunce of himself.”
“Well,” says I, “maybe he is; but, if he is, I ‘m mistaken
the worst sort. Maybe so, maybe so; but, if I am, I’ll suﬀer
by it; I’ll be a Democrat if it turns out that Shields is a
Whig, considerin’ you shall be a Whig if he turns out a
Democrat.”
“A bargain, by jingoes!” says he; “but how will we ﬁnd
out?”
“Why,” says I, “we’ll just write and ax the printer.”
“Agreed again!” says he; “and by thunder! if it does turn
out that Shields is a Democrat, I never will — —”
“Jeﬀerson! Jeﬀerson!”
“What do you want, Peggy?”
 “Do get through your everlasting clatter some time, and
bring me a gourd of water; the child’s been crying for a
drink this livelong hour.”
“Let it die, then; it may as well die for water as to be
taxed to death to fatten oﬀicers of State.”
Jeﬀ run oﬀ to get the water, though, just like he hadn’t
been saying anything spiteful, for he’s a raal good-hearted
fellow, after all, once you get at the foundation of him.
I walked into the house, and, “Why, Peggy,” says I, “I
declare we like to forgot you altogether.”
“Oh, yes,” says she, “when a body can’t help themselves,
everybody soon forgets ’em; but, thank God! by day after
to-morrow I shall be well enough to milk the cows, and pen
the calves, and wring the contrary ones’ tails for ’em, and
no thanks to nobody.”
“Good evening, Peggy,” says I, and so I sloped, for I seed
she was mad at me for making Jeﬀ neglect her so long.
And now, Mr. Printer, will you be sure to let us know in
your next paper whether this Shields is a Whig or a
Democrat? I don’t care about it for myself, for I know well
enough how it is already; but I want to convince Jeﬀ. It may
do some good to let him, and others like him, know who
and what these oﬀicers of State are. It may help to send the
present hypocritical set to where they belong, and to ﬁll the
places they now disgrace with men who will do more work
for less pay, and take fewer airs while they are doing it. It
ain’t sensible to think that the same men who get us in
trouble will change their course; and yet it’s pretty plain if
some change for the better is not made, it’s not long that
 either Peggy or I or any of us will have a cow left to milk, or
a calf’s tail to wring.
Yours truly,
REBECCA —— — .
 I
 I A I
  
 H 
     A .
SPRINGFIELD, ILL., Aug 29, 1842.
HON. HENRY CLAY, Lexington, Ky.
DEAR SIR: — We hear you are to visit Indianapolis,
Indiana, on the 5th Of October next. If our information in
this is correct we hope you will not deny us the pleasure of
seeing you in our State. We are aware of the toil necessarily
incident to a journey by one circumstanced as you are; but
once you have embarked, as you have already determined
to do, the toil would not be greatly augmented by extending
the journey to our capital. The season of the year will be
most favorable for good roads, and pleasant weather; and
although we cannot but believe you would be highly
gratiﬁed with such a visit to the prairie-land, the pleasure it
would give us and thousands such as we is beyond all
question. You have never visited Illinois, or at least this
portion of it; and should you now yield to our request, we
promise you such a reception as shall be worthy of the man
on whom are now turned the fondest hopes of a great and
suﬀering nation.
Please inform us at the earliest convenience whether we
may expect you.
Very respectfully your obedient servants, A. G. HENRY, A.
T. BLEDSOE, C. BIRCHALL, A. LINCOLN,
 G. M. CABANNISS, ROB’T IRWIN, P. A. SAUNDERS, J. M.
ALLEN, F. N. FRANCIS.
Executive Committee “Clay Club.”
(Clay’s answer, September 6, 1842, declines with
thanks.)
  
     
 
   A 
   H   I
 
 
 HI  
  
  .
TREMONT, September 17, 1842.
ABRA. LINCOLN, ESQ.: — I regret that my absence on
public business compelled me to postpone a matter of
private consideration a little longer than I could have
desired. It will only be necessary, however, to account for it
by informing you that I have been to Quincy on business
that would not admit of delay. I will now state brieﬂy the
reasons of my troubling you with this communication, the
disagreeable nature of which I regret, as I had hoped to
avoid any diﬀiculty with any one in Springﬁeld while
residing there, by endeavoring to conduct myself in such a
way amongst both my political friends and opponents as to
escape the necessity of any. Whilst thus abstaining from
giving provocation, I have become the object of slander,
vituperation, and personal abuse, which were I capable of
submitting to, I would prove myself worthy of the whole of
it.
In two or three of the last numbers of the Sangamon
Journal, articles of the most personal nature and calculated
to degrade me have made their appearance. On inquiring, I
was informed by the editor of that paper, through the
medium of my friend General Whitesides, that you are the
 author of those articles. This information satisﬁes me that I
have become by some means or other the object of your
secret hostility. I will not take the trouble of inquiring into
the reason of all this; but I will take the liberty of requiring
a full, positive, and absolute retraction of all oﬀensive
allusions used by you in these communications, in relation
to my private character and standing as a man, as an
apology for the insults conveyed in them.
This may prevent consequences which no one will regret
more than myself.
Your obedient servant, JAS. SHIELDS.
  
  .  HI  
 .
TREMONT, September 17, 1842
JAS. SHIELDS, ESQ.: — Your note of to-day was handed
me by General Whitesides. In that note you say you have
been informed, through the medium of the editor of the
Journal, that I am the author of certain articles in that
paper which you deem personally abusive of you; and
without stopping to inquire whether I really am the author,
or to point out what is oﬀensive in them, you demand an
unqualiﬁed retraction of all that is oﬀensive, and then
proceed to hint at consequences.
Now, sir, there is in this so much assumption of facts and
so much of menace as to consequences, that I cannot
submit to answer that note any further than I have, and to
add that the consequences to which I suppose you allude
would be matter of as great regret to me as it possibly
could to you.
Respectfully, A. LINCOLN.
  
 A.  I
 
 
   
  A .  HI  
TREMONT, September 17, 1842.
ABRA. LINCOLN, ESQ.: — In reply to my note of this
date, you intimate that I assume facts and menace
consequences, and that you cannot submit to answer it
further. As now, sir, you desire it, I will be a little more
particular. The editor of the Sangamon Journal gave me to
understand that you are the author of an article which
appeared, I think, in that paper of the 2d September
instant, headed “The Lost Townships,” and signed Rebecca
or ‘Becca. I would therefore take the liberty of asking
whether you are the author of said article, or any other
over the same signature which has appeared in any of the
late numbers of that paper. If so, I repeat my request of an
absolute retraction of all oﬀensive allusions contained
therein in relation to my private character and standing. If
you are not the author of any of these articles, your denial
will be suﬀicient. I will say further, it is not my intention to
menace, but to do myself justice.
Your obedient servant, JAS. SHIELDS.
  
 A
 
  I
   
  I
   
  . H.
    
A
Lincoln’s Second,
SEPTEMBER 19, 1842.
In case Whitesides shall signify a wish to adjust this
aﬀair without further diﬀiculty, let him know that if the
present papers be withdrawn, and a note from Mr. Shields
asking to know if I am the author of the articles of which he
complains, and asking that I shall make him gentlemanly
satisfaction if I am the author, and this without menace, or
dictation as to what that satisfaction shall be, a pledge is
made that the following answer shall be given: “I did write
the ‘Lost Townships’ letter which appeared in the Journal of
the 2d instant, but had no participation in any form in any
other article alluding to you. I wrote that wholly for
political eﬀect — I had no intention of injuring your
personal or private character or standing as a man or a
gentleman; and I did not then think, and do not now think,
that that article could produce or has produced that eﬀect
against you; and had I anticipated such an eﬀect I would
have forborne to write it. And I will add that your conduct
toward me, so far as I know, had always been gentlemanly;
and that I had no personal pique against you, and no cause
for any.”
 If this should be done, I leave it with you to arrange what
shall and what shall not be published. If nothing like this is
done, the preliminaries of the ﬁght are to be — First.
Weapons: Cavalry broadswords of the largest size, precisely
equal in all respects, and such as now used by the cavalry
company at Jacksonville.
Second. Position: A plank ten feet long, and from nine to
twelve inches broad, to be ﬁrmly ﬁxed on edge, on the
ground, as the line between us, which neither is to pass his
foot over upon forfeit of his life. Next a line drawn on the
ground on either side of said plank and parallel with it,
each at the distance of the whole length of the sword and
three feet additional from the plank; and the passing of his
own such line by either party during the ﬁght shall be
deemed a surrender of the contest.
Third. Time: On Thursday evening at ﬁve o’clock, if you
can get it so; but in no case to be at a greater distance of
time than Friday evening at ﬁve o’clock.
Fourth. Place: Within three miles of Alton, on the
opposite side of the river, the particular spot to be agreed
on by you.
Any preliminary details coming within the above rules
you are at liberty to make at your discretion; but you are in
no case to swerve from these rules, or to pass beyond their
limits.
  
  
 H A  .     
.
SPRINGFIELD, October 4, 1842.
DEAR SPEED: — You have heard of my duel with Shields,
and I have now to inform you that the dueling business still
rages in this city. Day before yesterday Shields challenged
Butler, who accepted, and proposed ﬁghting next morning
at sunrise in Bob Allen’s meadow, one hundred yards’
distance, with riﬂes. To this Whitesides, Shields’s second,
said “No,” because of the law. Thus ended duel No. 2.
Yesterday Whitesides chose to consider himself insulted by
Dr. Merryman, so sent him a kind of quasi-challenge,
inviting him to meet him at the Planter’s House in St. Louis
on the next Friday, to settle their diﬀiculty. Merryman made
me his friend, and sent Whitesides a note, inquiring to
know if he meant his note as a challenge, and if so, that he
would, according to the law in such case made and
provided, prescribe the terms of the meeting. Whitesides
returned for answer that if Merryman would meet him at
the Planter’s House as desired, he would challenge him.
Merryman replied in a note that he denied Whitesides’s
right to dictate time and place, but that he (Merryman)
would waive the question of time, and meet him at
Louisiana, Missouri. Upon my presenting this note to
Whitesides and stating verbally its contents, he declined
 receiving it, saying he had business in St. Louis, and it was
as near as Louisiana. Merryman then directed me to notify
Whitesides that he should publish the correspondence
between them, with such comments as he thought ﬁt. This I
did. Thus it stood at bedtime last night. This morning
Whitesides, by his friend Shields, is praying for a new trial,
on the ground that he was mistaken in Merryman’s
proposition to meet him at Louisiana, Missouri, thinking it
was the State of Louisiana. This Merryman hoots at, and is
preparing his publication; while the town is in a ferment,
and a street ﬁght somewhat anticipated.
But I began this letter not for what I have been writing,
but to say something on that subject which you know to be
of such inﬁnite solicitude to me. The immense suﬀerings
you endured from the ﬁrst days of September till the
middle of February you never tried to conceal from me, and
I well understood. You have now been the husband of a
lovely woman nearly eight months. That you are happier
now than the day you married her I well know, for without
you could not be living. But I have your word for it, too, and
the returning elasticity of spirits which is manifested in
your letters. But I want to ask a close question, “Are you
now in feeling as well as judgment glad that you are
married as you are?” From anybody but me this would be
an impudent question, not to be tolerated; but I know you
will pardon it in me. Please answer it quickly, as I am
impatient to know. I have sent my love to your Fanny so
often, I fear she is getting tired of it. However, I venture to
tender it again.
 Yours forever, LINCOLN.
  
  A
    . I 
I
.
SPRINGFIELD, November 2, 1842.
JAS. S. IRWIN ESQ.: Owing to my absence, yours of the
22nd ult. was not received till this moment. Judge Logan
and myself are willing to attend to any business in the
Supreme Court you may send us. As to fees, it is impossible
to establish a rule that will apply in all, or even a great
many cases. We believe we are never accused of being very
unreasonable in this particular; and we would always be
easily satisﬁed, provided we could see the money — but
whatever fees we earn at a distance, if not paid before, we
have noticed, we never hear of after the work is done. We,
therefore, are growing a little sensitive on that point.
Yours etc., A. LINCOLN.
