 4 
And Ours Shall Be the 
Victory 
THE MOVING FORTRESS 
Accounts written solely from official records can be seriously 
misleading. A history of the principate in the Rome of Augustus 
would be defective if based mainly on his decrees; and classical Athens 
is barely comprehensible if the archaeological evidence, as in 
monuments and inscriptions, is used to the exclusion of eyewitness 
reports. This caution needs to be applied with the same rigour to more 
recent times. The decrees of the Bolsheviks in the Civil War must not 
be treated as an accurate gauge of reality. Few states in history had 
announced punitive sanctions as severe as the Russian Socialist 
Federative Soviet Republic. Nor were Lenin and his colleagues 
pusillanimous in the exercise of repression. Merciless struggle, 
monolithic unity and and the strictest discipline were catch-phrases 
of Bolshevik public life. Yet practical implementation was patchy. The 
legislation, moreover, tended to become more severe as previous laws, 
already themselves severe, had proved ineffectual. 
There can equally be no doubt that the Bolsheviks were violent on a 
massive scale even if not as comprehensively as was their officially-
stated intention. Kolchak's spring offensive was awaited with disquiet 
in 1919: the Red terror was intensified. With his 110,000 men, Kolchak 
had the largest of the three White armies. After the Eighth Party 
Congress, Lenin and his colleagues informed local Bolshevik bodies 
that an 'extraordinarily threatening danger' was posed from the east. In 
fact the sprawling lines of the Whites allowed Trotski and 
Commander-in-Chief Vacietis to re-group their defences. The Reds 
mounted a counter-offensive on 28 April. Ufa, which had fallen to 
Kolchak in mid-March, was back in Red hands on 9 June. Admiral 
Kolchak, now recognised by General Denikin as Supreme Ruler, won 
no further major battle. The Reds took Perm on I July, Omsk on 14 
November. The White army fled in chaotic fashion and mid-Siberia 
was returned to Bolshevik rule. Kolchak had overlooked his personal 
safety, and was captured and interrogated. In February 1920 he was 
executed on orders from Moscow. Lenin had spent the previous 
months calling for the forces of Kolchak to be fought and pursued 
88 
 And Ours Shall Be the Victory 
89 
without mercy; but he did not want to appear responsible for 
Kolchak's summary liquidation. 1 
His reasons are perplexing. He gave orders that any future official 
explanation should suggest that local Bolsheviks were responding to a 
local emergency. This was very like what he had done about the murder 
of the Imperial family in July 1918. It is improbable, however, that he 
feared the peasantry's hostility on the grounds of having killed a 
popular military hero. Nor is he likely to have worried that, if the Reds 
even then lost the Civil War or if an anti-Bolshevik crusade from 
abroad succeeded, similar treatment might be meted out to him in 
retaliation; for he knew his deeds had already made him a marked 
man2 It may simply be that he wanted to persuade other White units to 
surrender of their own volition.3 
General Denikin on the Southern front became the most acute threat 
to the Reds.4 To the Eastern front political commissars, fighting 
Kolchak, Lenin had written on 29 May 1919: 'If we haven't conquered 
the Urals by the winter, I consider the doom of the Revolution 
inevitable.'5 But the series of telegrams he was to produce for the 
Southern front were even more strident. In politics, he was always keen 
to assert a single overriding priority at any given moment. He acted the 
same in warfare. In October a previously obscure White army under 
General Yudenich moved out of Estonia towards Petrograd. Lenin 
refused to accept that Yudenich should be taken seriously. 'It's clear,' 
he cabled to a Petrograd Soviet which did not share his viewpoint, 'that 
the Whites' offensive is a manoeuvre to distract our pressure upon the 
south.'6 As Yudenich's offensive proved difficult to resist, however, 
Lenin had to consider how many forces to transfer northwards. On 
balance, he was even willing to give up Petrograd without a fight. In 
1917 he had criticised Aleksandr Kerenski for planning to let the city 
fall into German hands; 7 now he argued that it would be no great loss. 
Returning to Moscow, Trotski upbraided Lenin; and he found support 
not only from his sympathiser Krestinski but even, to his surprise, from 
Stalin. Lenin gave way, but not before precious time was lost in 
securing Petrograd's defences. Commander-in-chief S. S. Kamenev 
made precisely this complaint, and Lenin on 22 October acknowledged 
that a mistake had been made. 8 On the previous day he had heard that 
Tsarskoe Selo, twenty kilometres from Petrograd, had been occupied 
by Yudenich. But the line held. The Red forces, substantially 
reinforced, drove his 15,000 troops back. By mid-November, 
Yudenich's retreat had reached the Estonian border and his campaign 
was in tatters.9 
 90 
Lenin: A Political Life 
Earlier spats had occurred among Politburo members; but Lenin had 
avoided involvement. The principal disputants were Trotski, Zinoviev 
and Stalin. On 25 March 1919 Zinoviev had complained to the Central 
Committee that Trotski was ignoring the compromises on 'the military 
question' agreed by the Eighth Party Congress; and Lenin was asked to 
write to Trotski for redress. 10 But Trotski was worried by other 
military factors. He urgently wanted to clear his name in regard to the 
execution of commissar Panteleev; he also drew the Politburo attention 
to widely-felt resentment among Russians in the Red Army who felt 
that Jews and Latvians found it easy to secure posts in the rear rather 
than at the front. Trotski called for an ethnic redistribution of 
manpower .11 
Yet Trotski was playing the game too hard. He supported the 
sacking of S. S. Kamenev as commander of Red forces on the Eastern 
front despite the remonstrations of Stalin. He continued to run the 
Revolutionary-Military Council from his special train, thereby 
escaping a degree of control from Moscow. He was unabashed about 
his support for ex-Imperial army officers. Already in May 1919 there 
had been signs that Lenin thought S. S. Kamenev to have been treated 
shabbily. 12 Matters came to a head at the Central Committee plenum 
on 3-4 July. Lenin, with reservations but also with decisiveness, took 
the side of Stalin and Zinoviev. The Revolutionary-Military Council 
was relocated to Moscow; and S. I. Gusev, one ofTrotski's critics, was 
appointed to its membership. To Trotski's annoyance, S. S. Kamenev 
was appointed Commander-in-Chief (and, for a few days, Vacietis was 
put under arrest on suspicion of treason). 13 Trotski left the meeting in a 
fury. Nevertheless Lenin would not go all the way with Stalin. The 
policy of employing Imperial army officers, which Stalin opposed, 14 
was retained. Lenin emphasised this in an open letter on behalf of the 
Central Committee on 9 July. He also called for an end to the officer-
baiting that had occurred in Petrograd: a hidden reference to Stalin's 
activity; and he repudiated Stalin's request to excise the relevant 
passage. 15 Yet Stalin did not walk away totally without satisfaction. 
An official decision on 14 July indicated that the influence of political 
commissars was to be increased at the expense of officers. He had won 
much of the post-Congress argument. 16 
Trotski had asked to step down as People's Commissar for Military 
Affairs on 5 July. Only the unequivocal countermandment of both the 
Politburo and Orgburo dragged him back to normal work. The same 
session also expanded his scope to run specifically the Southern front. 17 
Red offensives had been resumed in March, April and May 1919, but 
 And Ours Shall Be the Victory 
91 
were all repulsed. In late June, Denikin's forces seized Kharkov and 
Tsaritsyn. On 3 July, as the Bolshevik Central Committee was having 
its frantic meeting in the capital, Denikin issued his Moscow Directive. 
His commanders were instructed to advance north along the Volga and 
through Ukraine with all speed. Meanwhile Denikin occupied Kiev 
and Odessa on 23 August, and such was his success that Orel was under 
his occupation by 14 October. He was 350 kilometres from Moscow, 
and Lenin was not minded to deflect manpower to protect Petrograd. 18 
Yet this was the extent of Denikin's success. A staunch Red 
counterattack was launched and by mid-November was proving 
successful. By 16 December 1919 Denikin had lost Kiev. The retreat 
became a rout. Tsaritsyn was re-taken by the Red Army in January 
1920, Ekaterinodar in March. The remnants of Denikin's Volunteer 
Army evacuated themselves from southern Russia to the Crimean 
peninsula. Kolchak was dead. Yudenich was a refugee in Estonia. 
Hopes that the White administration in Arkhangelsk, with its British 
protectors, might pose a military threat to Petrograd proved illusory. 
The Bolsheviks and their Red Army, almost to their own surprise, had 
pulled off victory in the main theatre of conflict over the Russian 
empire. Lenin celebrated enthusiastically. It was a victory won at much 
greater cost than the triumphs of the October Revolution. And yet he 
was unforthcoming about the Civil War. 19 He and the Politburo had 
had no time to draw breath since 1918. How Lenin evaluated the 
capacities of Kolchak, Denikin and Yudenich is unclear. Possibly he 
gave them no thought at all. He must have recognised his own luck. His 
government started the Civil War holding Moscow and Petrograd and, 
therefore, the surest links of communications and transport with the 
rest of the country. The bulk of the population also lived under 
Bolshevik rule.2° 
Furthermore, he fought the war politically as well as 
militarily. He was determined to use the sensitivities of the non-
Russians to maximum advantage despite his own party's suspicious-
ness about his policies; and, chaotically though his state was organised, 
it had the edge over the various White administrations. 
But what a manoeuvrer he was! Having had little but trouble from 
the Cossacks since 1917, he spotted that they were falling out with 
Denikin by 1919. Very well, then: Bolshevik propaganda should be 
diverted towards attracting their support!21 And how he could dispense 
with allies when their usefulness was over. Both Nestor Makhno and 
Nikolai Grigorev in Ukraine had fought alongside the Red Army with 
their irregular local peasant forces. But they and Lenin had no illusions 
about each other. Once Denikin was defeated, they fell into dispute. 
 92 
Lenin: A Political Life 
The Red Army ruthlessly secured dominance over its rivals. Not that it 
failed to make strategic and organisational mistakes. There were plenty 
of them, and Lenin's misjudgement about Petrograd was simply the 
one he was personally and primarily responsible for. But he had made 
fewer than most of his colleagues; and those, like Kamenev, who 
foresaw difficulties more clearly than he, would never have led the 
Bolsheviks to the party's satisfaction. 
GATHERING THE LANDS 
It had been the ending of the Great War rather than any success 
against the Whites that had first brought Lenin and his colleagues back 
to deliberations on the 'national question' in the former Russian 
empire. The German military collapse left a vacuum of power in the 
previously-occupied lands. Soviet republics had quickly been estab-
lished in Estonia, Lithuania and Belorussia, Latvia and Ukraine. The 
Constitution of the Russian Socialist Federal Soviet Republic (or 
RSFSR) drawn up in summer 1918 was extremely unspecific; and even 
debate at the Eighth Party Congress had avoided specifying what 
relations were to be pursued among the various republics. 22 
Nevertheless the beginnings of a policy, while not being advertised, 
were already in place and were about to be extended. The creation of 
independent Soviet republics had been initiated by Lenin. Lest there 
should remain any doubt he had sent a telegram to I. I. Vacietis, 
Supreme Commander of the Red Army, on 29 November 1918 
insisting that such a proliferation would 'remove the opportunity for 
the chauvinists of Ukraine, Lithuania, Latvia, Estland [i.e. Estonia: 
RS] to regard the movement of our units as an occupation'. Otherwise, 
Lenin added, the troops of the Reds would not be treated as 
'liberators'.23 Lenin worked closely with Stalin, who was still the 
People's Commissar on Nationality Affairs, on all these matters. 
Sovnarkom charged Stalin with the task of drawing up decrees 
recognising the new Soviet republics.24 The central party leadership, 
moreover, was already exercised by geo-strategical considerations. In 
the winter of 1918-1919, Adolfloffe was sent to Belorussia to persuade 
local Bolsheviks that the RSFSR's interest would be served by a line of 
'buffer republics' between itself and powerful states to the west. 25 Their 
immediate re-incorporation into an undisguisedly Moscow-based state 
might instigate an even more British and French anti-Bolshevik 
crusade than at present. Lenin kept a rein on policy. Leading local 
 And Ours Shall Be the Victory 
93 
Bolsheviks in each Soviet republic were not easily reconciled to their 
own declarations of independence. The Latvian Petr Stucka and the 
Lithuanian V. S. Mickevicius-Kapsukas, both being former Central 
Committee members, were put under pressure to become 'separa-
tists'.26 Another local leader, V. G. Knorin of the party's North-West 
Regional Committee, maintained that the Belorussians were not a 
nation and that official policy engendered nationalism.27 
But these Bolsheviks did not control the Red Army. Without Lenin's 
assistance, they could not conquer their own countries. The policy of 
Lenin, Stalin and Trotski had therefore to be accepted. Nikolai 
Krestinski on II January 1919 had been asked by the Central 
Committee to clarify relations between the central party apparatus 
on the one hand and the newly-formed republican governments, 
republican party bodies and even the People's Commissariat of 
Nationality Affairs on the other.28 But the only published elucidation 
was the Party Congress decision to treat the Ukrainian, Belorussian, 
Lithuanian and Latvian Communist Parties as regional party 
organisations subordinate to the authority of the Russian Communist 
Party in Moscow. Republics could have formal independence only so 
long as republic party bodies were strictly controlled by the Central 
Committee and its Politburo in Moscow.29 
That a close formal link between the RSFSR and the other Soviet 
republics (and not just between party bodies) should be forged had 
been decided, but was not announced. The Central Committee on 16 
January 1919 had secretly ordered Bolsheviks in Belorussia to inititate 
negotiations for a 'union' of all the republics, including Russia.30 
Evidently Lenin did not want to be seen as an initiator. The fiction of 
non-intervention by Moscow in non-Russian affairs had to be 
maintained. It was several weeks after the Party Congress before 
policy was further defined. The push for tight unification had grown 
even in the central party organs. For example, the Politburo on 23 
April 1919 resolved to ask the Ukrainian Bolshevik leadership to 
ascertain how best 'a fusion of Ukraine with Soviet Russia might be 
arranged'.31 Such language indicated that Lenin was yielding now to 
the arguments of the Stuckas and the Mickeviciuses. His change of 
stance is not explained in the Politburo minutes; but probably he 
sensed that the military threat from the West had disappeared. 
Germany was subject to the Treaty of Versailles. In March 1919 the 
British decided to withdraw their troops from northern Russia. 
Furthermore, the Bolsheviks in command of the other republics were 
not always sensitive to national traditions - and often they carried 
 94 
Lenin: A Political Life 
through measures in total defiance of local society.32 For example, the 
Ukrainian Bolsheviks had harassed the so-called middle peasantry and 
tried, in places, to impose collective farming by force. Consequently 
Lenin may well have judged greater centralisation of authority to be 
less risky than letting the local Bolshevik-led governments enjoy much 
autonomy. Not that Lenin ever needed great encouragement to 
centralise! Consideration was given on 12 May to a plan for the 
'unification' of the RSFSR and the Ukrainian Soviet republic with 
single People's Commissariats for Military Affairs, the Railways, 
Finances and Labour as well as a single Supreme Council of the 
National Economy.33 
Ukrainian Bolshevik consent was also to be sought; and yet, even 
before treaty documents were signed, Lenin approved a directive to the 
party leadership in Kiev stipulating that 'the People's Commissars of 
the RSFSR should become People's Commissars of the Union with the 
People's Commissariats of Ukraine as their regional plenipotenti-
aries'.34 Still an attempt was made in public to hide these centralist 
realities. Full integration of all Soviet republics was not yet anticipated. 
Consultations proceeded with Bolsheviks in the other republics. 
Instead, on 1 June 1919, a draft resolution was taken from Lev 
Kamenev at the Politburo in favour of a 'military-economic union' of 
Russia, Ukraine, Latvia, Lithuania and Belorussia.35 
This kind of union fell a long way short of political fusion or even 
federation. But only on paper. The Politburo controlled the entire 
party and, despite occasions of serious disobedience, the Civil War 
witnessed a strong insistence of authority on local Bolsheviks and 
consequently on republic governments. In August 1919 Christian 
Rakovsky, chairman of the Ukrainian Sovnarkom, was brusquely 
ordered by the Politburo to close down several People's Commissariats 
and to dispense with a Ukrainian Council of Defence and Labour.36 A 
contrast is sometimes drawn between Lenin and Stalin on basic aspects 
of the national question. This is wishful thinking. The differences were 
wholly of secondary importance. Lenin liked to finesse the appearance 
of policy to a greater extent than Stalin. He also strove to offer minor 
titbits as concessions to non-Russian national opinion. Typically he 
wrote an open letter on 28 December 1919 stating that it was up to the 
workers and peasants of Ukraine to determine 'exactly what federative 
link' to have with Soviet Russia.37 No such statements were made by 
Stalin, Trotski or Zinoviev. But Lenin was disingenuous. He had no 
intention of holding a plebiscite on secession, on federation, on one-
party rule or on anything whatsoever. He was not even going to allow 
 And Ours Shall Be the Victory 
95 
free debate inside the Ukrainian Communist Party. By the end of 1919 
he was stamping hard on the chest of local political life, and went on 
doing so until his own physical breath deserted him. 
Yet there was an issue which, while not having a primary 
significance, mattered a lot. Stalin as People's Commissar for 
Nationality Affairs was only biding his time as he supported the 
formation of a military-economic union. Naturally he had no 
objections to particular further measures which increased the power 
of Moscow vis-a-vis the republics. But his inclination in the longer term 
was to create a blatantly unitary and centralised state which would 
differ in structure from the former Russian empire only in granting 
regional autonomy to areas such as Ukraine. 
What Stalin had in mind was the extension of the principle of the 
Bashkir republic which was already part of the RSFSR. Since the 
beginning of 1918 it had been party policy to set up administrative 
enclaves wherever a non-Russian nationality lived in large numbers. 
This was discovered to be easier said than done. The first large 
enterprise was the project for a 'Tartar-Bashkir republic'. It was 
planned by Stalin's Commissariat as early as 18 March 1918, but the 
battles with the Whites in the Volga region and the Urals rendered it 
impracticable for a whole year. This was not the only trouble. 
Relations between Tartars and Bashkirs left much to be desired. 38 
Furthermore, the Tartars against the expectations of the Bolsheviks 
proved to be aggressively self-assertive. Presumably Lenin and Stalin 
worried also lest too large a Turkic-speaking enclave might result; and 
they thought it better to foster the creation of not one large but two 
smaller enclaves. In March 1919 the decision was taken to form an 
autonomous Bashkirian republic. The Bashrevkom still caused 
problems. It clashed with the 'Russian' Provincial Cheka in Ufa, and 
Stalin was called in to mediate between them in September. 39 Then a 
dispute erupted with the Kirgiz Revkom, which had been set up in July, 
over territorial boundaries. The clashes persisted into October, and 
again the Politburo had to step in. As if this was not enough, the 
exiguous Bolshevik cadres in the Tartar-inhabited lands could not be 
counted on to support the formation of a Tartar Republic along the 
model of Bashkiria. The Politburo resolved on 13 December 1919 that 
only with their sanction would the republic be established.40 
The basic problem was that, as the Mensheviks had warned the 
Bolsheviks before 1917, the former Russian empire was a quilt of 
interstitched nationalities. No single ethnic group lived alone in a 
clearly demarcated zone; and, as often as not, the attempt to designate 
 96 
Lenin: A Political Life 
such zones aggravated inter-ethnic tensions. There was some 
compensation for the Bolsheviks. Stalin in 1920 was applauded at 
the Politburo for suggesting that poor Chechens in the North Caucasus 
should be rewarded with the land of locally-expropriated Cossack 
'kulaks'.41 The policy was judged to be so successful that it was ordered 
to be applied, with appropriate modifications, throughout 'the East' .42 
Bolshevism had a deficiency of party cadres in the North Caucasus and 
Central Asia. In trying to rally support among the resident non-
Russians, the Politburo judged that its appeal would be greatest among 
the lower social strata within them. 
Yet this same device was fraught with dangers. Mirsaid Sultan 
Galiev, a rare Bolshevik from Tataria, had come to believe in the 
necessity of a huge Turkic-speaking socialist state being carved out of 
the Russian empire, larger even than the ill-fated Tartar-Bashkir 
Republic. He also wanted aspects of Islam to be grafted on Bolshevik 
thought.43 The Politburo on 26 August 1920 was to refuse him 
permission to attend the Congress of the Peoples of the East in Baku.44 
Lenin manifestly wanted to resolve the 'national question' within tight 
parameters. A maverick such as Sultan Galiev might turn into a 
Soviet Ataturk. In addition, the non-Bolshevik members of the 
Bashrevkom proved even more intractable in 1920 than in 1918-
1919. Some who rebelled against Sovnarkom were put under arrest 
and, on Stalin's recommendation, transferred to Moscow prisons.45 
The old empire was a mass of turbulent ethnic conflicts. By 1920, too, 
as the end of the Civil War hove in sight, the reconquest of the 
Transcaucasus became possible. An Azerbaidzhani Soviet Republic 
would be declared in April, an Armenian Soviet Republic in 
November. Nor would the announcement of a Georgian Soviet 
Republic be long delayed.46 Being so closely involved both as People's 
Commissar and as Politburo expert, Stalin concluded that enough was 
enough. A RSFSR incorporating the various Soviet republics on the 
Bashkirian model was his proposed solution. Stalin's knowledge of the 
question was gaining respect among fellow central party leaders. 
Only Lenin seriously opposed him. To Lenin, it was self-evident that 
a fictional federation disguising a real centralist state was massively 
preferable to an overtly centralist state. The perturbations with the 
Bashkirs would be trivial in comparison with those likely to be 
unleashed by the Ukrainians. The aUiance between Stalin and Lenin on 
the 'national question' which had held firm against criticism at the 
Seventh Party Conference of April1917 and the Eighth Party Congress 
of March 1919 was beginning to break apart. Both men had adjusted 
 And Ours Shall Be the Victory 
97 
their opinions in the light of experience; but this led to a parting of the 
ways. Stalin was moving further and further away from pragmatic 
compromise with nationalist opinion among non-Russians; and Lenin 
could not be indifferent to the danger this involved: Stalin had 
positioned himself much closer than before to the conventional 
attitudes of the Bolshevik leadership at central and local levels. A 
clash between Lenin and Stalin might be postponed, but not 
permanently avoided.47 
WAR LEADER 
Lenin was one of the few leaders to stay in Moscow throughout the 
Civil War. The only other Central Committee member not to venture 
forth from the capital was Nikolai Bukharin, who was Pravda's editor; 
even Krestinski and Kamenev, who spent most of their time there, were 
given occasional secondments elsewhere. Just once Lenin took a trip to 
another Russian city after the capital's transfer to Moscow in February 
1918: this was his sojourn in Petrograd in July 1920 for the start of the 
Second Congress of the Communist Internationa1.48 Lenin had no 
metropolitan prejudice. But he had an exceptional inclination towards 
centralism, and assumed that his presence in Moscow was crucial to the 
smooth running of the central political machinery. He considered his 
contribution to the war effort irreplaceable. An avoidance of physical 
danger was consequently essential. Since before the Great War he had 
carried a Browning pistol. 49 After the February Revolution of 1917 he 
had undeniable reason to guard against assassination; but in neither of 
the attempts on his life in 1917-1918 did he remove the firearm from its 
holster. Duckshooting was the nearest he came to experience of armed 
combat in the Civil War. He visited no front. The nearest he came to a 
Red Army conscript was on Red Square when greeting a parade 
commemorating the October Revolution;50 and his contact with 
commanders was limited to conversations in the Kremlin, more often 
than not by telephone. 
It is striking how little the conditions of the Civil War entered his 
speeches and articles. The same had been true in the Great War; and 
his notes on the theories of von Clausewitz, made by him in 1915, had 
indicated no great empathy with the sufferings of soldiers. 51 The cliches 
of wartime reportage passed him by. In mid-1917 he had adduced a 
chance meeting with an old peasant woman in a Pravda article.52 No 
such anecdotes appeared in his journalism in the Civil War. Old 
 98 
Lenin: A Political Life 
peasant women in 1918-1920 would have provided him with little in 
the way of politically supportive anecdotes. 
The impression should not be given that his life was entirely 
cocooned. More than once his chauffeur Stepan Gil was flagged down 
by Moscow policemen and the official Kremlin limousine fired upon. 
This even occurred when Lenin, after the arrest of the Left Socialist-
Revolutionaries in July 1918, visited their headquarters. He tried to 
keep a residual contact with ordinary daily existence.53 As always, he 
talked to visitors to Moscow who were fellow party members; he also 
continued to receive groups of peasants who, as once they had brought 
their grievances to Nicholas II, picked out Vladimir Lenin as the new 
'little father'. Despite all the posters and newspaper photographs, 
however, Lenin's image was not well-known among Moscow's 
inhabitants. This had been crudely proved on 19 January 1919. Lenin 
and his sister Mariya were being driven by chauffeur Gil to the 
Sokolniki district on the outskirts of Moscow to visit his wife 
Krupskaya. As they approached the nearby railway bridge at around 
six o'clock in the early evening darkness, a small gang of men leapt into 
the middle of the road. Lenin and Gil assumed that they confronted yet 
another police check. Nothing could be further from the truth. The 
gang members were robbers. Lenin was relieved of the contents of his 
pockets, including his Browning pistol. The thieves put a gun to his 
head so as to impel his co-passengers to collaborate. Lenin was not 
completely intimidated. Rather he was astounded, and shouted out to 
them: 'My name is Lenin.' The expected reaction was not forthcoming. 
The gang not only did not recognise him; they did not even think that 
the name was of any significance. When he demanded to see their 
official documents, they retorted: 'Criminals don't need official 
documents.' 54 
They then ejected everyone from the official limousine and sped off 
in it. Lenin had further humiliation in store. He and Mariya turned up 
at the building of the Sokolniki District Soviet only to discover that 
even there no one knew what he looked like. The robbers had 
absconded with his passcard! Eventually he was believed, and 
Dzierzynski was summoned to Sokolniki to hear Lenin's complaints 
about the Cheka's level of efficiency. Within days the 'bandits' were 
arrested. They sought mercy on the grounds that they had assumed 
they were robbing someone calling himself Levin rather than Lenin. 55 
Thus they intimated that they thought their victim to be Jewish. This 
was not taken as an extenuating circumstance. After all, the Bolshevik 
party was committed to the eradication of anti-semitism (and, although 
 And Ours Shall Be the Victory 
99 
the fact was not bruited, Lenin was anyway part-Jewish by descent). 
The robbers were executed. Lenin joked about his surrender of pistol 
and wallet to the gang in terms borrowed from the lexicon of Marxism: 
'Such a compromise was akin to our compromise with the bandits of 
German imperialism. '56 
This was self-parody; but it conveyed the combative posture of his 
leadership. A less ironic example of his militancy occurred in an argy 
bargy over the command appointments in May 1919. Lenin's telegram 
to Trotski ran as follows: 'In connection with the coded telegram from 
the three commanders of the Eastern front I propose we should 
appoint [S. S.] Kamenev as front commander, remove Kostyaev and 
appoint Lashevich instead of Aralov. Send a reply about the plenum. I 
fear that Stalin will not be able to make it for the twenty fifth [of May: 
RS], and it is harmful to drag you away. I therefore make a proposal 
for the plenum's postponement and for negotiations to take place over 
the telegraph.'57 He could also turn on the pressure on military 
administrative bodies. Once the strategy was fixed through discussion 
with Trotski and the Red Army commanders, he harassed officials to 
implement decisions. A telegram to Kiev, also sent in May 1919, 
minced no words: 'I repeat my request to telegram me twice weekly 
about the actual assistance to the Donbass. I insist on the fulfilment of 
this request. Don't lose the moment of victory over Grigorev, don't let 
go a single soldier from those who fought against Grigorev. Put out a 
decree and bring into effect the disarming of the population; shoot on 
the spot in any case of a hidden rifle. '58 Sometimes he jabbed even at 
Trotski: 'I'm extremely staggered by your silence at a moment when, 
according to information received albeit not yet verified, a break-
through in the Millerovo direction had widened and assumed the 
dimensions of an almost completely irretrievable catastrophe. '59 
Yet his interference was limited mainly to emergencies; he recognised 
that Trotski, Stalin and other Bolshevik commissars at the fronts had 
to take decisions without automatic detailed consultation with 
Moscow. His own greatest contribution came through his chairman-
ship of the central party and government bodies which presided over 
the war effort. Lenin was the motor of the political machinery. He 
mobilised concerted effort. He ensured co-operativeness - not an 
insignificant achievement in the light of the contempt shown to each 
other by Trotski, Stalin and Zinoviev. He was a co-ordinator of people 
and institutions. 
In 1919 he dominated the affairs of Central Committee and 
Politburo. In accordance with arrangements made in the previous 
 100 
Lenin: A Political Life 
year, the central party bodies constituted the apex of the state's 
deliberative and decision-making mechanisms. The Politburo exerted 
the most powerful influence in the Kremlin. It directed foreign policy, 
guided the Communist International, laid down economic and social 
policy, supervised the work of all state institutions and controlled 
military strategy. No party or governmental body came near to it in 
importance. The Orgburo, which had been established as a parallel 
inner subcommittee of the Central Committee to handle organisational 
questions, yielded to the insistence that the Politburo should control 
appointments to the most important party and governmental posts.60 
Lenin habitually chaired Politburo sessions. No official title was 
accorded to him; but he was the unchallengeably pre-eminent member 
of the central party apparatus. And, through the Politburo, he 
intervened frequently in cases of disagreement among Central 
Comittee colleagues. They had learned to trust him. Not even the 
Politburo could meet regularly; Trotski, Stalin and Zinoviev were 
usually distant from Moscow. He sent telegrams to them, asking for 
their opinions on items on the Politburo agenda.61 None of them could 
complain that major decisions were made without prior deliberation. 
His aggressive telegrams caused no offence. Lenin's colleagues appear 
to have treated them as reassurance that someone in the Kremlin cared 
about them and their work. 
If he made his major impact upon the war effort by means of the 
Politburo chairmanship, his contribution was also great to state 
institutions. Chief among these initially was Sovnarkom. It was in the 
collegiate deliberations of the People's Commissars that Lenin 
managed to put flesh on the bone of Politburo decisions. After 
Sverdlov's death the legislative work of the Central Executive 
Committee of the Congress of Soviets became even more of a 
formality. Sovnarkom's decrees gained in importance; and Lenin 
ensured that the Politburo's wishes were not merely sanctioned but also 
elaborated before public announcement. Few decrees with a specifi-
cally military implication in any case went through Sovnarkom. 
Instead they were saved for the Council of Workers' and Peasants' 
Defence, especially if they touched on matters of supply to the Red 
Army. The Council was an adjunct of Sovnarkom; its chairman was 
Lenin.62 
In an average day, which was extremely busy, Lenin sought to 
impose the Politburo's will on a state which was woefully chaotic 
despite its aspirations. Winning the next battle and getting basic 
supplies to soldiers and workers was as much as he could realistically 
 And Ours Shall Be the Victory 
101 
aim at. This he achieved only in part. Few colleagues questioned but 
that he did as well as anyone might have done in the circumstances. At 
a joint session of the Politburo and the Orgburo it was suggested, on 29 
April 1919, that he should write leaflets for distribution to peasants.63 
(It was a perennial criticism, since before the Great War, that he wrote 
too much for sophisticated Marxists and too little for ordinary folk.). 
But compliance was not enforced. A source of greater irritation was his 
practice of doing things through the Politburo even when there were 
enough Central Committee members currently in Moscow to make a 
quorum; but nothing was done about this until the end of 1920 (when 
Politburo members were in dispute with each other).64 On the whole, 
he was given the benefit of the doubt. His supreme position in Soviet 
politics was accepted as necessarily deflecting him from such tasks. The 
co-ordination of the Politburo, Central Committee, Sovnarkom and 
the Council of Workers' and Peasants' Defence was extraordinarily 
taxing; and he did it with suitable modesty. He neither received nor 
asked for any special title. 
There was an element of hypocrisy here. Aleksei Rykov was 
appointed 'dictator for military supply' in mid-1919; it was a noisome 
appellation which annoyed Rykov.6s But Lenin was among several 
central party colleagues who insisted. He was imposing upon Rykov 
something which he would have resisted for himself. Lenin's refusal of 
titles, awards and celebrations was to some extent a self-regarding 
tactic. He wanted everyone, including the closest associates, to perceive 
him as lacking all personal ambition and lust for power and renown. 
Not that the modest persona he cultivated in public was entirely 
artificial. Lenin was genuinely devoid of vanity. He abhorred the 
ceremonials of the tsars; he despised the pomp and sartorial carefulness 
of Western liberal and conservative leaders as well as the moderate 
socialists who emulated them. And, if he had lived to witness it, he 
would have been both appalled and amused by the strutting behaviour 
of Mussolini and Hitler. Lenin was a fellow of simple habits. He drank 
little, ate plainly, took walks around the Kremlin. Only a few perks 
came his way. He went shooting in the forests with leading Bolsheviks. 
He had his personal chauffeur, and servants cleaned the Kremlin 
apartment he shared with Nadezhda Krupskaya. He had a large library 
in his Kremlin office; his requests for books from Moscow libraries and 
from bookshops abroad were given priority. When convalescing, he 
could use the Gorki sanatorium thirty five kilometres from Moscow. 
Yet the little time he spent away from Moscow and political leadership 
was far from being non-political. His only friends were Bolsheviks. 
 102 
Lenin: A Political Life 
Nearly all were comrades rather than friends. Inessa Armand still loved 
him, but was rarely in Moscow. He let few people close to his 
innermost feelings. Such comforts as were available to him from his 
position as head of government were anyway regarded by Lenin as 
enabling him to concentrate upon the consolidation of the October 
Revolution. 
EXPORT OF REVOLUTION, SIEGE ECONOMY 
The activities of Lenin and his associates in 1919 demonstrate that, 
after the treaty of Brest-Litovsk, the party still adhered to its objective 
of European socialist revolution. The Hungarian Soviet Republic's 
formation was greeted warmly in Moscow. Its leader Bela Kun was to 
reveal, indiscreetly, that considerable financial assistance reached him 
in Budapest and that Lenin had been the instigator of its provision.66 
Lenin also wished to supply military assistance to the extent that the 
Red Army was capable. On 21 March he cabled to General Vacietis: 
'The advance into part of Galicia and Bukovina is necessary for 
contact with Soviet Hungary. This task must be accomplished more 
quickly and soundly, but no occupation of Galicia and Bukovina is 
necessary beyond the limits of this task.' He then added: 'The second 
task is to establish a link with Soviet Hungary along the railways.'67 
The limit on Lenin's willingness to deploy force was the contemporary 
threat posed by Admiral Kolchak in the Civil War. On 13 May he 
encouraged Kun by sending a telegram indicating that 'yesterday 
Ukrainian armed forces, having beaten the Romanians, crossed the 
river Dniestr'.68 He and the rest of the Bolshevik leadership had been 
equally cheered by the communist seizure of power in Munich. A 
Bavarian Soviet Republic was declared in mid-April. In northern Italy, 
especially Turin, workers' councils were being established with the 
participation of local communists. It was beginning to look as if the 
predictions made by Lenin in 1917 were coming true. 'However heavy 
the situation,' he claimed before the Moscow City Soviet, 'we can 
confidently say that we will defeat international imperialism.'69 
Already, however, the Hungarian and Bavarian Soviet Republics 
appeared fragile, and Lenin sensed that the Hungarian comrades were 
too reckless for their own good. On 23 March he insisted that Kun 
should avoid a 'naked imitation' of the October Revolution in 
Russia.70 Romanian troops advanced in the direction of Budapest in 
the second fortnight of April. Kun pleaded in vain for Red Army 
 And Ours Shall Be the Victory 
103 
detachments.71 The most that Lenin, Chicherin, Trotski and the 
generals would allow was the dispatch of forces to menace the 
Romanian forces from the rear; 72 but a full-scale invasion was ruled 
out. The Bavarian Soviet Republic was suppressed in early May. On 18 
June, Lenin advised Bela Kun to open negotiations with the Allies 
rather than fight on hopelessly.73 Kun was tom between unrealistic 
ambition and despair; he was also rancorously, unfairly accusing 
Chicherin and Rakovsky of abandoning him. Lenin defended his 
colleagues; but the sole counsel he could give was as follows: 'Hold on 
for all you are worth, and ours shall be the victory.'74 
Lenin was wrong about this: the Hungarian Soviet Republic was 
overthrown by late August and Bela Kun fled to Moscow. Yet Lenin 
was right in his caution about international relations in the Baltic 
region. Not only did he and Chicherin aim to avoid giving offence to 
the Allies; they also strained to minimise the involvement of the 
independent states in the anti-Bolshevik military operations of the year. 
The Estonian, Latvian and Lithuanian communist governments 
established in the winter of 1918-1919 quickly collapsed. Estonia 
resumed its independence from Moscow in February 1919. The 
Lithuanian Soviet Republic, proclaimed in January, was merged with 
the Belorussian Soviet Republic into the so-called 'Litbel'; but it was 
crushed in April, partly as the result of a Polish incursion. By May the 
Latvian Soviet republic had also been disbanded. As the Red Army 
concentrated upon Denikin, the Politburo sought peace with the Baltic 
states. Its members were prodded by Chicherin into considering a 
settlement. The matter came before the Politburo on II September, and 
it took all the pressure that Lenin could muster to secure a decision to 
end the condition of war with Latvia and Lithuania as well as with 
Finland. Estonia was not yet considered for inclusion in the process, 
presumably because Yudenich remained on its territory. Lenin's 
difficulty lay in countering the arguments of the 'native' communist 
leaders of the Baltic region who wanted to keep their respective 
countries on the agenda of revolutionary expansion. But Lenin pulled 
the Politburo to his pragmatic viewpoint. Political and military 
prudence prevailed.75 
The Estonian question continued to divide the Politburo. Trotski 
demanded the Red Army's right to invade the country if its 
government gave sanctuary to Yudenich (as was to happen in mid-
November). 76 Chicherin opposed on the grounds that such a policy 
would destroy the impression, eagerly cultivated by Soviet diplomacy, 
that the Russian republic was uninterested in extending socialism to 
 104 
Lenin: A Political Life 
foreign states on the point of a bayonet.77 It was a matter of public 
appearance; Chicherin was not hostile in principle to military conquest, 
but judged the moment politically inappropriate. Initially he had 
Lenin's support.78 But subsequently Lenin agreed with Trotski that 
Yudenich should not only be driven back from Petrograd but also be 
sought out and liquidated as a military force.79 
But not even Trotski wanted the reconquest of Estonia; and, once 
Yudenich had been defeated, negotiations with the Estonian govern-
ment were undertaken. By late December Estonian independence had 
been recognised; by early February 1920 there were full diplomatic 
relations between Tallinn and Moscow. A breach in the wall of 
international capitalism, Lenin felt, had been obtained. The Allies were 
not as easily wooed as were these former provinces of the Russian 
empire. Even so, there were signs of a breakthrough. Lloyd George 
questioned the practicability of the Allied economic blockade from 
September 1919. The treaty of Versailles had been signed in June, and 
imposed a huge indemnity upon Germany. The subsequent treaties of 
St Germain and Trianon had broken up the Habsburg lands into 
separate states. Militarily, too, it was very punitive. Quite what might 
soon be inflicted upon the Soviet regime was open to guesswork. 
Through summer 1919 Lenin kept a discreet silence about Allied 
intentions.80 He must have been relieved that his dire predictions about 
the imperialism of the United Kingdom and France in 1917 were not 
fulfilled.81 He may well have been momentarily putting his eggs in the 
basket of European revolution and hoping for success in Hungary and 
elsewhere. Whatever he was thinking, he knew that a purely Russian 
programme of action would not bring salvation. Events in Europe had 
to have their own dynamism. For this reason he could hardly fail to 
breathe a sigh of relief when, in April, the French began to pull back 
from Odessa. Still more encouraging was the decision of the Supreme 
Allied Council in January 1920 to lift its blockade of Soviet Russia.82 
Just as he had not highlighted the danger from the Allies in mid-
1919, so Lenin eschewed any welcome for the lifting of the blockade. 
He had no wish to appear to be at the mercy of foreign states. But he 
wished also to make maximum use of the situation: the official policy 
of Sovnarkom in 1918 to seek concessionnaires abroad to sink capital 
into Russian industry was resumed. Precisely this was said by Lenin in 
an interview with the Christian Science Monitor in September 1919.83 
At the same time he jotted down an open letter to American workers 
justifying such a demarche.84 Nevertheless, knowing the unpopularity 
of concessions and being busy with a thousand other duties, Lenin left 
 And Ours Shall Be the Victory 
105 
it to the People's Commissariat of Foreign Trade to draw up a detailed 
plan in January.85 The incumbent supreme official was Lev Krasin, 
who submitted theses on concessions to Sovnarkom under Lenin's 
chairmanship on 20 March 1920.86 
So what on earth was Lenin up to? His commitment to European 
socialist revolution, strong as it was, was subsumed under the priority 
for the survival of the Russian Socialist Federal Soviet Republic. This 
had never disappeared from his calculations; and, to his satisfaction, it 
had also become the viewpoint of most of his Left Communist 
opponents of 1918. Lenin and his colleagues were disappointed by 
events in Munich and Budapest in 1919. They still expected that a 
fraternal regime would emerge somewhere in Europe. The communist 
political advances in northern Italy were encouraging, and the set-back 
in Germany was not reckoned to be permanent. Lenin perceived that 
the punitive terms of the treaty of Versailles could not but help the 
cause of the Communist International in Germany. At the time he 
behaved cautiously, barely commenting on the treaty.87 And in any 
case he wanted to ride two horses at once. If European socialist 
revolution was still his hope, he was equally determined to attract 
capital investment in Russia from foreign entrepreneurs. The contra-
dictions in this dual policy did not worry him. Likewise he would aim 
to procure security for his party and state by playing upon the divisions 
of interest among the 'imperialist powers' around the world. Ultimate 
optimism was accompanied by short-term manoeuvring and compro-
mise. Lenin was a stealthy, sinuous politician.88 
Nowhere was he more subtle than in his statements on the Soviet 
economy. In 1917 he had often explained his project for industry and 
agriculture; in 1919 he judged it best to maintain the reticence 
observable in the previous year. The single topic attracting generous 
comment was the food-supplies situation; and he mentioned his 
passion about the country's electrification but twice in the year after 
the Eighth Party Congress.89 For the rest of the time he dwelt on 
generalities: nationalisation, forcible procurement, centralisation and 
discipline. 90 
His stance was calculated for public effect. In the Sovnarkom and 
the Council of Labour and Defence he was highly active and highly 
vocal. He was sensitive to the run-down of industrial output. The 
priority was not yet reconstruction of factories and mines but the 
maintenance of those which might be crucial to the war effort. The Red 
Army needed guns and munitions. For this reason, special attention 
was given to the armaments plants in Petrograd and Tula. Strikes 
 106 
Lenin: A Political Life 
broke out all over the areas controlled by the Russian Soviet republic. 
The laws became ever more severe; but they reflected the weakness of 
the authorities.91 The Politburo, recognising the need to keep at least 
the acquiescence of the working class, was horrified by work-stoppages 
in Ivanovo-Voznesensk- the main textile city. The People's Commissar 
of Food Supplies, Aleksandr Tsyurupa, was instructed to divert grain 
to bring the strikes to an end.92 In general the Politburo- as well as all 
the state agencies which were subordinate to it - maintained the 
development of policies from 1918.93 Nationalisation of industry 
descended from large-scale enterprises down to small factories and 
even mere workshops. Sovnarkom's decrees entrusted an increasing 
authority in the Supreme Council of the People's Economy. And yet 
the collapse of factory and mining output accelerated. The official 
industrial value in 1919 was merely forty four per cent of what it had 
been in the previous year.94 Desperate People's Commissars were 
driven to allowing temporary remissions in the ban on private trade in 
food. The sack-men who brought grain into the cities were supplying a 
half of the urban diet even when their activities were illega1.95 
Nevertheless there was no relenting in the policies of party and 
government. No faction in the party called for change apart from the 
emerging Workers' Opposition. The Left Communists no longer 
existed as a separate group. The centralising and nationalising 
tendencies were entirely to their liking: they had lost the diplomacy 
of Brest-Litovsk but won the economics of Civil War. The Military 
Opposition had no particular opinion of industry, agriculture and 
trade; and this was true also of the Democratic Centralists. Even the 
Workers' Opposition, led by Aleksandr Shlyapnikov, had yet to 
elaborate their proposal. Shlyapnikov wanted to provide workers and 
peasants with greater control over production and distribution in the 
economy. He emphasised the role to be played by the trade unions as a 
counterweight to the Bolshevik party. But it was a sign of Lenin's 
confidence that he refrained from comment on Workers' Oppositionist 
notions.96 
Initiative in foreign and military affairs came often from Lenin, but 
not in relation to the economy in 1919. Trotski inaugurated the debates 
in the central party leadership. He it was who, on 15 January 1920, 
instigated the formation of 'labour armies' out of peasant conscripts 
who were expecting to be demobilised as the Civil War's end drew 
within sight. In Trotski's view, the methods which had won the War 
should be applied to peacetime economic reconstruction. It was 
therefore crucial to apply military discipline to the workforce.97 Stalin 
 And Ours Shall Be the Victory 
107 
went along with Trotski's argumentation and became leader of the 
First Labour Army.98 Lenin ostensibly felt likewise. But he chose his 
words carefully when supporting the labour armies. In a speech to the 
Moscow Provincial Party Conference on I 3 March I 920, which was 
censored heavily in the report by Pravda, he gave his approval to the 
labour armies only reservedly. He argued that the very size of the Red 
Army made rapid demobilisation impossible. Consequently, according 
to Lenin, the troops should be retained under military discipline and 
deployed for economic duties.99 This was a long way from endorsing 
labour armies as a main durable agency of post-war reconstruction, 
and exemplified the disjunction between the thinking of Lenin and 
Trotski. Militarisation of labour, for Lenin, was a regrettable necessity 
and not a policy to glory in. 100 
Lenin and Trotski gave their speeches on the issues without naming 
each other in dispute; the tone was comradely. In the Central 
Committee, however, tempers flared. In February 1920 Trotski put 
forward yet another proposal. This time he suggested that the dire 
shortage of bread in the towns could be solved only by removing 
certain regions of the country - Ukraine, the Don and Siberia - from 
the system of forcible grain requisitioning. The situation in the Urals 
had convinced him that peasant hostility to the regime would otherwise 
increase beyond controt. 101 
Trotski did not imply that his proposed reform was to be permanent. 
Nor did he fail to stress that it should be restricted to certain regions; 
and he also insisted on the desirability of introducing collective farms 
and compulsory labour in them -and, despite his later attempt to gloss 
over the fact, he did not envisage the project of labour armies for 
battle-hardened Red conscripts as an alternative to his proposals for 
agriculture. On the contrary, they were complementary to each other. 
Force was basic to his perspective on both urban and rural economic 
reconstruction. 102 And yet, to his astonishment, the Central Committee 
debate was furious. Grain requisitioning was the cornerstone of 
Bolshevik wartime policy: the idea that a private market in wheat and 
rye might return was anathema to the party's leaders. Lenin was so 
infuriated that he accused Trotski of supporting 'Free Trade-ism'. 103 
The vote went against Trotski by eleven to four. Thereby a chance was 
lost to restore the exchange of goods between town and countryside. 
Trotski was badly shaken by his experience. He never ceased to believe 
that the Central Committee had been wrong to reject his proposal, and 
took a bitter pleasure a year later when his persecutor Lenin instigated 
a reform of food-supplies policy remarkably similar to his own. 104 But 
 108 
Lenin: A Political Life 
on this occasion Trotski did not fight his corner. Lenin had won the 
debate, and Trotski chose to concentrate on his work in the Red Army 
and areas of economic policy where he could get Lenin to compromise 
with him. 105 
LENIN AND RELIGION 
Among the subjects which had been aired at the Eighth Party Congress 
had been religion. Surveys carried out in the mid-1920s were to show 
that the great majority of the Russian population remained Christian 
by belief; and the Bolsheviks knew that in the peripheral zones of the 
old empire - in the Ukraine, the Baltic region, Georgia and Armenia -
devotion to national denominations had been unaltered by the calls of 
the party to abandon the faith. The Muslim populations of 
Azerbaidzhan, central Asia and the Volga region were deeply attached 
to their religious customs. Most citizens of the Soviet republic ruled 
over by the godless Lenin were believers. 
After the October Revolution he had taken a lead in the 
government's measures. His Land Decree at the Second Congress of 
Soviets had expropriated all the landed property of the Russian 
Orthodox Church, and his Basic Law on the Socialisation of the Land 
in February 1918 had confirmed this_l 06 The intention was that, by 
undermining the economic resources of religious institutions, popular 
belief in God (or god, as Lenin put it) would be foreshortened. Other 
measures, too, were put in hand. Civil marriages and civil divorces were 
discussed in Sovnarkom and passed into law. 107 Lenin had gone 
through a Church marriage ceremony in Siberia in 1898, giving 
Krupskaya a copper ring made by a local artisan. 108 He now broke the 
legal link between wedding ceremonies and religion. At first the 
Orthodox Church kept out of politics; but on 19 January, when the 
Germans seemed likely to overrun Russia and eliminate Bolshevism, 
Patriarch Tikhon pronounced an anathema on Sovnarkom. This was 
not a call to arms: priests were instructed to undertake only passive 
resistance. 109 The regime intensified the pressure. Lenin on 23 January 
1918 signed a Decree on the Separation of the Church from the State 
and School from the Church. This forbade the Church to hold property 
and prohibited its involvement in general schooling. It could no longer 
own even its cathedrals; and, on 19 April 1918, the People's 
Commissariat of Justice established a Liquidation Department for 
the purpose of nationalising the Church's property. 110 Tikhon bowed 
 And Ours Shall Be the Victory 
109 
before superior physical force. On 25 September 1918, after the Red 
Army had turned back the Czechoslovak Legion's invasion, he 
enjoined his fellow believers to recognise the authority of the Soviet 
state so long as its orders did not contravene the dictates of their 
consciences. He refused to send blessings to the White armies in the 
Civil War. 111 
Tikhon wanted the Reds to be defeated and did not withdraw his 
anathema on them; but his aim was to facilitate the Church's survival 
until such time as Lenin's government fell from office. Lenin 
appreciated the potential of the Patriarchate as a focus for anti-
Bolshevik opposition. But he, too, acted cautiously. On 20 October 
1918, at the First All-Russian Congress of Women Workers, he argued 
that excessive zeal in the extirpation of 'religious prejudices' would be 
counterproductive. 'The masses' would only split into separate camps, 
and the party would lose support. 112 At the Eighth Party Congress in 
March 1919 he suggested that the Bolsheviks would merely give rise to 
fanaticism if offence was given to the beliefs of Christians. Atheism had 
to be disseminated tactfully so that 'an actual liberation of the 
labouring masses from religious prejudices' might occur.113 
This attitude to ordinary Russian Orthodox believers was counter-
parted by a savage persecution of the Church's leaders. Lenin was 
cunning. Tikhon was spared imprisonment because of the likely 
popular hostility; but other servants of the Church were less fortunate. 
According to figures released by Tikhon, twenty eight bishops and 
thousands of priests were killed between 1918 and 1920. Even 12,000 
ordinary believers were arrested during religious devotions and 
executed. 114 It is highly improbable that Lenin strongly disapproved. 
He disguised his attitude, presumably for fear of infuriating the 
faithful. He rarely spoke about the Orthodox Church in the first three 
years of his rule; those speeches at the Congress of Women Workers 
and at the Eighth Party Congress were the sole major examples. He and 
his fellow leaders desisted from reconsidering their policies on the 
Orthodox Church once the decrees of 1918 had been issued. liS Behind 
the scenes, Lenin blatantly fomented anti-religious violence. A 
telegram from him to the Penza Soviet Provincial Executive 
Committee on 9 August 1918 may well be the tip of a bloodstained 
iceberg: 'Received your telegram. It is necessary to organise a 
reinforced guard from specially trustworthy people to carry out a 
merciless mass terror against kulaks, priests and White Guardists; to 
lock up doubtful types in a concentration camp outside the town. Get 
an expedition in motion. Telegraph about implementation.' 116 
 110 
Lenin: A Political Life 
The Russian Orthodox Church was the one remaining institution 
capable of rallying most ethnic Russians against Sovnarkom and was 
singled out for maltreatment by the Cheka. 117 Lenin and Dzierzynski 
took a different attitude to the other Christian denominations. This 
self-restraint was entirely a matter of Realpolitik. As early as 1903, at 
the Second Party Congress, Lenin had brought the 'sects' to the party's 
attention. Their grievances against the Romanov autocracy, he argued, 
should be used by Marxists as a means of strengthening the struggle 
against Nikolai II. The party should campaign for freedom of 
conscience for all denominations; and Lenin's friend V. D. Bonch-
Bruevich, an expert on the sects, was encouraged to write pamphlets 
explaining how the egalitarian ideals of early Christianity could be 
implemented only by a state committed to Marxism. 118 
Even so, Lenin did not publicly refer to the sects at all in the Civil 
War. He mentioned Judaism and Islam only rarely. He took the 
trouble to oppose antisemitism by recording a speech, 'On the Pogrom 
Slandering of the Jews', on a new-fangled gramophone disc. 119 But 
only a few thousand Russians had gramophones and the speech was 
not carried by any newspaper. 120 Lenin's attentiveness was little greater 
towards Islam. On 20 November 1917 he and Stalin had co-signed a 
proclamation to 'all labouring Moslems of Russia and the East' which 
guaranteed their freedom to worship; 121 Lenin also warned at the 
Eighth Party Congress in March 1919 against offending Muslim 
sensibilities, and declared that the influence of the mullahs in central 
Asia was even greater than the influence of priests in Russia. 122 But 
otherwise he avoided the topic of religion. Not even at the Second 
Congress of the Communist Organisations of the Peoples of the East, 
on 22 November 1919, did he expatiate on his views. 123 The reasons for 
this failure can only be guessed at. But one factor must surely come 
into the reckoning: this is that the Bolsheviks were already regarded by 
many Russian Orthodox Christians as a gang of marauding Jews. 
There was no disguising the fact that persons of Jewish origin were the 
largest ethnic group in the Central Committee; and even the non-
Jewish members of the Central Committee were, by a majority, non-
Russian. Almost certainly Lenin did not want to inflame Russian 
popular opinion by siding too openly with religious believers who did 
not belong to Russia's national church. His decrees of 1917 and the 
Soviet Constitution of July 1918 had promulgated freedom of 
conscience in the Soviet republic. This, he must have felt, was already 
enough. 
 And Ours Shall Be the Victory 
111 
Not that conditions were pleasant for these other religious believers-
be they Christian sectarians, Jews or Moslems- in the Civil War. The 
separation of the Orthodox Church from the state had been greeted by 
them as a sign that the discrimination against them practised under 
Nicholas II and not entirely removed even by the Provisional 
Government had been abolished. Yet the interlude came to an end. 
The various decrees in 1918 on property, on schooling and on the 
propagation of religious faith were applicable to them as well as to the 
Church of Tikhon; and, as the Red Army asserted control in areas 
where the population held to their traditional religion, there were 
frequent barbarities. 
In Lenin's defence it could be said that religious persecution was not 
confined to the actions of the Reds. The Whites treated non-Christians 
appallingly and antisemitism was a prominent aspect of their 
ideology. 124 Most Jews preferred to live under Lenin than under 
Kolchak. In any case his target for persecution was not the generality 
of believers but their organisations, buildings and official representa-
tives. If he had wished to direct the Red terror against all believers, he 
would have threatened the lives of all but a minority of the population. 
Bishops and priests were indeed to be found ministering to the forces of 
the Whites. Lenin was fighting a Civil War; he would rather over-
repress than risk leaving opponents the chance to counter-attack. 125 
Nor was he the most avid advocate of militant atheism among the 
Bolshevik party leaders. In discussions over the Constitution in 
summer 1918 he had supported the formal right to conduct 'religious 
propaganda'. P. I. Stucka, People's Commissar for Justice, had led a 
group which regarded Lenin's position as unnecessarily indulgent to 
religion in general! 26 Lenin won the day. Even so, he continued to 
have to protect his position against Bolsheviks with ideas more extreme 
than his own. His words on religion at the Eighth Party Congress had 
been meant to restrain comrades such as Nikolai Bukharin who 
hankered after a more militant set of measures. 127 
All these extenuating factors notwithstanding, Lenin was a harrier of 
organised religion. Any gentleness towards it was based on pragmatic 
considerations. Any relief of persecution was only temporary. Religion, 
for him, had always been a 'a sort of spiritual pocheen in which the 
slaves of capital drown the image of man and their demand for a life 
more or less human'! 28 All contemporary metaphysical faiths were 
therefore 'organs of bourgeois reaction serving the defence of 
exploitation and the stupefying of the working class'. 129 Thus the 
 112 
Lenin: A Political Life 
Romanov autocracy had needed not only hangmen but also priests to 
maintain its power. 
These words were written before the First World War; but, although 
Lenin avoided such language after 1917, his sentiment was unchanged 
that religion was the opium of the people. The 'drug' was as widely 
used at the end as at the beginning of the Civil War; the Reds had 
merely assured themselves that the various faiths were unable to 
promote active resistance to the regime. But Lenin had yet to determine 
how his government should tackle the question of religion. Lenin's 
tirades against 'metaphysics' were made not against religious belief but 
rather against those Marxists who, in his view, had moved away from 
the materialist conceptions of Karl Marx. He sensed a particular 
potential menace in the growing attractiveness of the works of the ex-
Bolshevik Aleksandr Bogdanov (whom Lenin since 1908 had charged 
with the 'heinous' offence of philosophical idealism) to some of his 
close party co11eagues. 130 His own version of Marxism, he assumed, 
was sufficient to provide the ethical foundations of an entirely new 
social order. In a speech to the Third Congress of the Komsomol, on 2 
October 1920, he stated: 'We reject any such morality taken from a 
supra-human, supra-class conception. We say that it's a deception, that 
it's a swindle and a blocking-up of the minds of workers and peasants 
in the interests of landlords and capitalists. We say that our morality is 
entirely subordinate to the interests of the class struggle of the 
proletariat.' 131 
THE NINTH PARTY CONGRESS 
No Party Congress had met in so triumphal a spirit as the Ninth. 
Lenin, welcoming the 553 voting delegates to the Bolshoi Theatre on 29 
March 1920, exulted: 'The internal development of our revolution has 
led to the greatest, quickest victories over the enemy in the civil war 
and, because of the international situation, these victories have turned 
out nothing less than a victory of the soviet revolution in the weakest 
and most backward country, a victory over united global capitalism 
and imperialism.' 132 Expectations rose about central Europe. A report 
had just come through that 'the Berlin radio station lay in the hands of 
the German workers.' 133 In fact the Bolsheviks had yet again been 
misinformed. Yet they did but hope. Lenin gave the Central 
Committee's political report, emphasising that the Politburo 'had 
 And Ours Shall Be the Victory 
113 
resolved all questions of international and domestic policy'. 134 A 
furious denunciation of the Allies and all their works followed. But he 
stressed that certain capitalist powers were starting to reconsider their 
attitude. Latvia had made peace proposals. Finland wanted to agree on 
a demarcation line. Even Poland was making pacific overtures. 135 Yet 
Lenin did not delude his listeners; he declared that these 'small states' 
would be unable to make peace with Bolshevism unless the Allies, their 
creditors, gave permission. But he urged that Bolsheviks in the 
meantime should look on the bright side and get on with 'the peaceful 
tasks of economic construction'. The bourgeoisie had taken and kept 
power in their revolutions without prior administrative experience, and 
the workers would be able to cope equally well. 136 
Nikolai Krestinski followed Lenin with the Central Committee's 
organisational report. But at the second session, on 30 March, the 
Central Committee was rebuked. 137 Most speakers tacitly concluded 
that Lenin had placed excessive stress on the need for one-person 
leadership. But where did the need end? He was tweaked by T.V. 
Sapronov, the Democratic Centralist: 'In that case I put the question to 
comrade Lenin: just who is it who will be appointing the C[entral] 
C[ommittee]?'138 Sapronov prophesised that the result would be 'the 
dictatorship of the party bureaucracy' .139 He added: 'If you follow this 
system, do you reckon that therein will lie the salvation of the 
revolution?' 140 Only when L. M. Kaganovich pleaded for greater 
centralist severity did the tirades against Lenin relent. 141 B. M. Volin 
and others praised the Central Committee.142 Trotski, turning to the 
Ukraine-based opponents of the central party apparatus, questioned 
their own efficiency by claiming that, out of every hundred activists 
they mobilised to the Red Army, 'five went and ninety deserted.'143 
Krestinski did not trade insults, 144 1eaving it for Lenin to summarise 
the case for the Central Committee. Sapronov was accused of over-
gorging himself on theory. 'It is necessary,' declared Lenin in sprawling 
chunks of rhetoric, 'it is necessary to be able to grasp that we are now 
faced with a practical task, that we must deal with the businesslike task 
of the quickest victory over collapse and ruin with all the forces, with 
the genuinely revolutionary energy, with the uncompromising zeal with 
which our best comrades- the workers and peasants in the Red Army-
defeated Kolchak, Denikin and Yudenich.' 145 Too much theory, too 
little action: it was a cheeky attempt to turn defence into attack. And it 
worked: a majority of delegates voted to accept the joint reports of 
Krestinski and Lenin. 146 At session three, the same evening, Trotski 
kept up the non-apologetic style with his report on 'economic 
 114 
Lenin: A Political Life 
construction'. There had already been accusations that Aleksandr 
Shlyapnikov and other party figures seeking to defend workers' rights 
tended to be given jobs in the provinces or abroad so as to get them out 
of the way. Trotski did not play down his ideas before the Congress. He 
asserted that 'elements of compulsion' had to be incorporated in 
official labour policy. There should be 'militarisation' of the trade 
unions. Better an individual good technician running a factory than a 
collective of elected but unqualified workers. 147 
Trotski was followed by opponents, including People's Commissars 
N. Osinski and A. I. Rykov, who spoke against one-person leadership, 
non-electivity and militarisation. 148 Rykov was irritated at Trotski's 
jibe at him as military supplies 'dictator'. 149 At the fourth session, on 
31 March, Sapronov mentioned the personnel transfers in the 
Ukraine. 150 Trotski was implicitly criticised again when Milyutin 
urged that the single economic plan should not be a pretext for 
commissars from the Red Army to acquire civilian jobs. 151 But Lenin 
repaid Trotski's assistance to him. In particular, he charged Rykov and 
Milyutin with omitting to supply the Congress with sufficient statistical 
information to prove their case. He also quoted from his 1918 
pamphlet The Current Tasks of Soviet Power. 152 He evidently saw no 
threat to the Trotski-Lenin alliance on the economy; and Trotski felt 
sure enough of their relationship to admit that, under pressure from 
Lenin, he had excised the more centralising side of his theses. 153 
Bolshevism's two outstanding leaders presented a united front, not 
least on one-person leadership and on the need for a 'general state 
economic plan'. V. M. Smirnov comically asked what would happen to 
Trotski if Lenin took over the government singlehandedly. 154 Further 
teasing followed to the end of the fourth session and, that evening, at 
the fifth. 155 Trotski struck back. V. V. Kosior, he concluded, 'not only 
reads inattentively but also reads poorly'. Central Committee member 
M.P. Tomski fared no better: 'I regretfully have to say that comrade 
Tomski, who receives all the books, has been weaker on these questions 
than everyone, weaker even than comrade Osinski if this is possible. ' 1 56 
The wrangling continued until exhausted delegates voted to hand the 
draft resolution over to a commission for further editing. 157 At the 
sixth session on I April it was Bukharin who introduced the debate on 
the trade unions. The same questions of hierarchy, discipline and 
command re-imposed themselves. Bukharin, who together with Evgeni 
Preobrazhenski had just published his textbook The ABC of 
Communism, took Shlyapnikov to task as if he were an absent pupil. 
Shlyapnikov's wish to hand over economic management to the trade 
 And Ours Shall Be the Victory 
115 
unions overlooked the indissoluble bond of politics and economics. 
According to Bukharin, the party could not afford to abandon its role 
in economic leadership. 158 The trade unions would have managerial 
responsibilities. But Bukharin argued that they should fulfil them after 
having been transformed into state institutions. 'Statification' was the 
party's objective. Without referring to the controversy kicked up by 
Trotski, Bukharin acknowledged that the time was unripe for them to 
be turned into agencies of state; his report was a call for little to be 
changed in the short term. 159 
The status quo would not do not only for Workers' Oppositionist 
leaders like Y. 0. Lutovinov but also for M.P. Tomski as the party's 
appointee as chairman of the All-Russian Central Council of the Trade 
Unions. 160 They saw that the rags of trade union authority were about 
to be worn thinner. But their appeals fell on deaf ears. Bukharin's draft 
resolution was accepted as Congress policy.161 Lenin left things to his 
colleagues according to the pre-arrangement of the Central Committee. 
Tiredness was setting in. Radek's report on the Communist Interna-
tional was delivered without accompanying debate in the evening; and 
on the next day, 2 April, the delegates reduced discussion on the co-
operative movement and on political organisation by establishing 
separate sections to compose drafts for submission to Congress. 162 
Both were fraught affairs. Kamenev smoothed feathers in the 
organisational section. The draft resolution avoided most of the 
difficulties raised by the Democratic Centralists and the Workers' 
Opposition, and concentrated on the registration and indoctrination of 
rank-and-file party members. Passed unanimously by the section's 
commission, it was ratified on the nod by Congress at the opening of 
the eighth session on 3 April. 163 Lenin had less reason to thank his 
colleagues in the other section. The discussion on the co-operatives 
involved the whole basis of wartime economic policy. V. P. Milyutin, 
usually on the right in the politics of Bolshevism, secured the section's 
approval for theses demanding the nationalisation of co-ops and their 
transformation 'in a socialist direction'. 164 His demarche was a 
reminder that even the more cautious Bolsheviks were yet Bolshe-
viks: Milyutin overlooked peasant attitudes to nationalisation. 
Krestinski made this very criticism. 165 At this point Lenin, who had 
heard of the spat only the night before, intervened against Milyutin 
whom he accused of being impractical and ignorant of Lenin's ideas. 166 
Milyutin retorted that Krestinski had played unfair by appealing to 
'authorities'. This was the squeal of someone recognising that he would 
lose. But it was an accurate assessment of Lenin's status: the Congress 
 116 
Lenin: A Political Life 
reversed the section's choice and took Krestinski's draft theses as the 
basis of its resolution. 167 
Trotski momentarily took a leaf out of Lenin's book and avoided 
unnecessary controversy. But on 5 April, at session nine, his report on 
'the transition to the militia system' was heard respectfully as he 
mapped out his vision for the Red Army in what everyone thought to 
be the imminent period of peacetime reconstruction. Trotski kept clear 
of the disputed themes of the Eighth Party Congress: relations between 
party and army; military specialists; executions of communists. For 
once, Trotski adopted Lenin's technique of being vague in order to 
gather support at the time and have the freedom to act as he wished 
later. The Congress, opting not to open debate, unanimously accepted 
his draft resolution in its entirety. 168 
No Party Congress had gone so smoothly for Lenin. On 5 April he 
addressed its last session. The Central Committee elections had taken 
place, and he had retained his place with totally predictable ease. 
Twenty full places had been allocated. Lenin was unconcerned that 
leaders closer to Trotski than to him -
A. A. Andreev, E. A. 
Preobrazhenski and I. N. Smirnov - had entered since the previous 
year. Stasova's failure to keep a place, moreover, was a loss to him. But 
others who had not been elected at the Eighth Congress included A. I. 
Rykov, J. E. Rudzutak and F. A. Sergeev: each of them preferred Lenin 
to Trotski. 169 In any case this was not a Central Committee of factions. 
Disagreements and compromises were frequent, amicable and natural. 
Lenin confidently roused the Congress with his final oration. He 
declared that the 600,000 party members would 'work as one man after 
establishing a tighter link with the economic organs and the organs of 
the trade unions'. This seemed too tame for a closing speech, and he 
knew how little attention had been paid to the broadest aims of the 
party at the Congress. It was quite the most introspective Congress 
since before 1917. No one had picked up Radek's report on the 
Communist International in subsequent proceedings. Nor did anyone 
complain that the agenda had not even included the 'national question' 
in the lands of the Russian empire. Finishing his remarks on the 
economy, Lenin triumphantly proclaimed: 'We shall manage to resolve 
this problem just as victoriously as we resolved the military problem, 
and shall proceed quickly and firmly to the victory of the Worldwide 
Socialist Soviet Republic!' 170 
