 2 Closing the Circle 
ASSASSINATION ATTEMPT 
Rulers of any state usually try to regulate how much is known about 
them by their society. Their general custom before the twentieth 
century was to emphasise their majesty and difference from those 
whom they governed; but few of them failed to identify themselves 
somehow with their subjects. Some presented themselves as the 
embodiment of the virtues of their class, nation or empire. They 
explained their purposes as involving a public good which goes beyond 
mere personal self-aggrandisement. Practically every monarch of 
France, England or Spain in history engaged in all these enterprises. 
Yet a chasm was kept between rulers and ruled: the mystique of 
authority had to be preserved or else the existing social order might be 
dissolved. Only in small, primitive societies was it possible to maintain 
greater familiarity. The Bolsheviks were therefore the first to challenge 
this tradition in a modern society. Theirs was purportedly a workers' 
state. The interests of the working class were meant to take precedence 
over any other consideration. Lenin, Trotski, Zinoviev, Kamenev, 
Sverdlov: the entire leading cadre of the party took it as their duty to 
go frequently among the workers and impress them with their 
commitment to ideals which would soon become the predominant 
political reality. In fact the Bolshevik central leadership lived in 
conditions which, if they were modest by the standards of the tsars, 
were yet far removed from the still increasing poverty of Russian 
factory workers. Nor did any Central Committee member or People's 
Commissar intend to accede to popular aspirations when these 
included a demand that the one-party dictatorship should be brought 
to an end. But social intercourse with workers at their place of work 
was accorded a priority. In Petrograd this had involved a short walk 
from the government's offices to the nearest factories. The Kremlin in 
Moscow was some kilometres from industrial suburbs, but both Lenin 
and his comrades continued to intercalate speeches to mass meetings in 
their schedules of official activity. 
So it was on 30 August 1918 that Lenin had arranged to give a fifteen 
minutes' address in two separate places. The first was to be the Corn 
Exchange in the Basmanny suburb in Moscow. He was expected to 
29 
 30 
Lenin: A Political Life 
speak there in the afternoon and again at the Mikhelson Armaments 
Factory at around 6. 00 p.m. He dressed normally: his black three-
piece suit, a black lightweight knee-length overcoat. He was picked up 
from the Kremlin ground by his regular chauffeur S. K. Gil. And he 
had prepared an aggressive set of remarks. At the Corn Exchange he 
was on good form, telling his audience: 'Let every worker and peasant 
who has vacillated on the question of power take a look at the Volga, 
at Siberia, at Ukraine, and then the answer will come back by itself, 
clear and definite!'. 1 
Then on to Mikhelson's. In the factory yard, in the bright early 
evening, he gave a similar speech asking his audience to compare 
foreign capitalist countries with the nascent socialism of Russia? Even 
in the USA, he cried, ordinary working people were reduced to 'feudal 
slavery': 'Where the 'democrats' rule is the place that you'll find 
genuine, unvarnished robbery!'3 Russian workers ought by then to 
know better than the working classes abroad. Talk about a democratic 
republic or a Constituent Assembly should be treated as what it really 
was: a fairy-tale! There could be no compromise. Civic rights ought to 
be denied to 'the fraudsters, the parasites who are squeezing the blood 
out of the labouring people' .4 Lenin was now well into a rhythm. He 
needed no microphone. The crowd that had been gathering strained to 
hear him as others came along from off the street. Lenin's chauffeur 
Stepan Gil had parked the official car not far from the improvised 
platform. Lenin barked out the words, fist raised in the air and eyes 
sparkling in front of the jostling listeners. This was not an audience to 
regale with Marxist refinements. The October Revolution was in 
danger. The workers had to appreciate the jeopardy facing the regime-
their regime, as Lenin claimed it to be: 'We must hurl everything on to 
the Czechoslovak front so as to crush and shatter this entire gang 
which disguises itself with slogans of freedom and equality and shoots 
workers and peasants in their hundreds and thousands. There is only 
one way out for us: victory or death!'5 
These words in an instant acquired a sinister meaning. It was around 
8.00 p.m. that Lenin pressed his way through the crowd, waving good-
bye, towards the car. Gil started the engine. Yet before the car could 
start, three shots were heard. By-standers scattered, shouting: 'They've 
killed him, they've killed him!'6 Lenin had fallen to the ground. He had 
been hit twice on the left side of his body. One bullet lodged in his neck, 
the other in the lower part of his shoulder. Bleeding profusely, he was 
bundled into the vehicle by Gil and others. The car sped away from the 
scene of the shooting to the Kremlin. Doctors were summoned; the 
 Closing the Circle 
31 
Central Committee was alerted. Sverdlov took control of the 
governmental apparatus and waited to hear how badly hurt Lenin 
was. It was already clear that, if he lived, he would have survived by the 
last-minute reflex of jerking his head away from the perceived threat. 
Otherwise one of those two bullets would have done for him. 7 
Back at the factory there was pandemonium. The Cheka had had its 
men present at both the Corn Exchange and the Mikhelson Factory, 
and Bolshevik party officials likeN. Y. Ivanov had also been there to 
greet Lenin when he arrived to speak. 8 The gun, a Browning pistol 
numbered 150489, was picked up from the floor; but the would-be 
assassin had not been apprehended in the act. Such was the panic that, 
even though the shots had been fired at a range of a few metres, no one 
had tried to prevent the crowd's dispersal. Minutes later, the mistake 
was recognised and a frantic search was begun in the vicinity. This 
yielded an immediate result. A certain Fanya Kaplan had been seen 
coming to the factory gates as Lenin was finishing his speech, and she 
was detained.9 Gil later claimed to recognise her as the assailant. But 
there were doubts whether he had really been in a position to see things 
clearly or even whether his testimony was consistent in all its 
versions. 10 No one else had much claim to be taken seriously as an 
eyewitness. The only other person who may have seen the assailant was 
Lenin himself; yet he was convalescing during Kaplan's interrogation 
and had no influence on its course. 11 He had in fact been remarkably 
self-possessed while all around them lost their heads: 'Comrades, be 
quieti It's not serious! Stay orderly1' 12 Kaplan herself had not been 
much more forthcoming. When stopped in the factory yard, she blurted 
out: 'It wasn't me who did it!' 13 
This was eventually taken to be a suspicious statement; but it was in 
itself hardly an unusual thing to say: everyone in the yard knew by then 
what had happened to Lenin. She never confessed to having fired the 
shots. Spirited away into the custody of the Cheka, she entirely refused 
to co-operate with the authorities; and, in contrast with what might 
have happened to her a few months later, no physical pressure was 
applied to elicit further information. 
By then Yakov Sverdlov had been told what had happened. He took 
charge of the situation as Lenin's trusted governmental and party 
colleague, announcing at I 0.40 p.m. that the attempted assassination 
was the work of the Party of Socialist Revolutionaries. 14 Sverdlov was 
hasty in two respects. Among his colleagues there were several who 
thought that he displayed an undue enthusiasm about imposing 
personal control. Vladimir Bonch-Bruevich was to remember him as 
 32 
Lenin: A Political Life 
having boasted: 'You see, Vladimir Dmitrievich, we can get along 
without Lenin.' 15 Sverdlov also endeavoured to delay Lenin's return to 
work. 16 His eagerness stemmed from a zeal to prove that the 
Bolsheviks were not a one-man political party and from a wish to 
prevent Lenin from damaging his health by a premature resumption of 
official duties. Sverdlov's other manifestation of hastiness came with 
his incrimination of the Socialist Revolutionaries. He had extenuating 
factors on his side. On the same day as Lenin had been attacked in 
Moscow, a similar (and successful) attempt had been made on the life 
of the Cheka's chief in Petrograd, Moisei Uritski. There the assassin 
L.A. Kannegisser had Socialist-Revolutionary connections, and the 
Bolshevik central leaders were nervous lest a campaign of killings was 
being undertaken by a party which had been associated with a 
revolutionary strategy of assassinations. Kannegisser denied acting on 
the instructions of the Socialist Revolutionaries; and there was nothing 
to show that Fanya Kaplan was a Socialist-Revolutionary activist. 
Sverdlov and his colleagues were ruthlessly seizing a chance to lay 
collective guilt at the door of a party which had been overwhelmingly 
more popular that the Bolsheviks in the elections to the Constituent 
Assembly. 17 
It is extremely doubtful that Kaplan was the wielder of the gun. Her 
maiden name was Feiga Khaimovna Roitman and she was born in 
Ukraine, the daughter of Jewish parents, in 1887. In adolescence she 
became an anarchist. In 1906, while the Russian empire was in 
revolutionary turmoil, she and her companions prepared explosives to 
attack the provincial governor-general. The bomb went off accidentally 
in advance of the attempt. A maid in her hotel was fatally wounded. 
Roitman was apprehended, put on trial by a field court-martial and 
condemned to penal servitude for life after her death sentence was 
commuted. 18 
In prison she went blind; and, although her sight partially returned 
to her in 1912, she never completely recovered. 19 Kaplan, as she was by 
then known, was a most unlikely person to be asked to carry out an 
assassination. When a trial of Socialist-Revolutionary leaders was 
organised in 1922, testimony was offered that she had indeed been the 
culprit. But this trial was a disgrace to all standards of jurisprudence. 
Fictions abounded not only about Kaplan but also about the Party of 
Socialist Revolutionaries.20 It is well with the bounds of possibility that 
a group of Socialist Revolutionaries, working independently of their 
Central Committee, had engineered the assassination attempt. It is also 
plausible that Kaplan belonged to them. After her spell in prison before 
 Closing the Circle 
33 
the First World War, she stated that she considered herself 'a socialist 
with no particular party affiliation'.21 A liaison with Socialist 
Revolutionaries might have been acceptable to her. And yet, if she 
was at the Mikhelson Factory as the member of such a group, the 
others would surely not have chosen her as the assassin. Sverdlov, 
however, had made up his mind: Kaplan was to be adjudged guilty. 
There would be no trial, only an announcement that the death sentence 
had been carried out. The Party of Socialist Revolutionaries was to be 
outlawed on the grounds of state treason. Sverdlov wasted no time on 
Kaplan herself. Neither the Cheka nor the People's Commissariat of 
Internal Affairs were to be involved. He simply ordered the Kremlin 
commander P. Malkov to lead her from the detention cell for 
execution. Her remains were destroyed.22 
Sverdlov wanted to perpetuate the memory of the assault on Lenin 
while preventing a cult of the martyr who had allegedly attacked him. 
The swift dispatch of Fanya Kaplan also had avoided a protracted 
public examination of the holes in the case for the prosecution.23 Even 
Lenin was bemused by the rapidity. When shot, he had turned to Gil 
and asked: 'Did they catch him or not?'24 But he did not worry that, 
despite his assumption that a man had shot him, a woman had been 
executed. He put the incident completely behind him. Maksim Gorki 
visited some days later, and found him very phlegmatic: 'Just a scuffle. 
There's nothing to be done about it. Everyone acts according to his 
own fashion.'25 He knew that, even if Kaplan had not done the dirty 
deed, plenty of others would have been pleased to do it. A thorough 
investigation of a single assassination attempt would not have 
eradicated the continuing threat to his life. There were plenty of 
Socialist-Revolutionaries who would have volunteered to complete the 
job which Fanya Kaplan had been accused of undertaking. 
'PROLETARIAN REVOLUTION AND KAUTSKY THE 
RENEGADE' 
Lenin was too frail to write in longhand; but, being determined to use 
his unsought leisure to the full, he took on a short-hand secretary26 and 
began yet another booklet on Marxist theory: Proletarian Revolution 
and Kautsky the Renegade. His obsession with Karl Kautsky had not 
eased. Yuli Martov denounced The State and Revolution in terms as 
powerful as Kautsky's; but it was Kautsky who drew the ire of the 
 34 
Lenin: A Political Life 
Bolshevik leader.27 What particularly had annoyed Lenin was the 
publication in Vienna of a 63-page work entitled The Dictatorship of 
the Proletariat. Kautsky for the first time had dedicated an entire work 
to Lenin and the questions raised by him. The irritable and irritating 
mode of State and Revolution became splenetic. The fact that few 
copies of Kautsky's work were being bought in Berlin did not reassure 
Lenin. He proposed that Soviet diplomats should buy up all copies and 
distribute them to German and Swiss workers who should be 
encouraged to ensure that the entire printing be 'trampled in the 
mud'.28 
Kautsky had contrasted two directions in nineteenth-century 
socialist thought: the democratic and the dictatorial. He claimed that 
Marx had never wanted 'the dictatorship of the proletariat' to be 
unaccompanied by universal civic freedoms. Marx had supposedly 
meant only that the workers should retain dominant political and 
economic influence after the socialist revolution. The other social 
classes would not be disenfranchised, and Kautsky repeated that the 
Paris Commune - which had earned Marx's approval - had not 
abolished the voting rights of the middle classes.29 Lenin retorted that 
dictatorship meant dictatorship and that Marx knew the meaning of 
the word.3° Kautsky rejected this interpretation, he argued, because he 
abhorred violent revolution.31 Lenin had a point here. Marx and 
Engels wrote much on the desirability of violence to transform society 
whereas Kautsky assumed that, once the German imperial monarchy 
had been overthrown, the working class could advance to power by 
parliamentary means.32 Yet Lenin, too, was not wholly convincing; for 
it is far from clear that the co-founders of Marxism consistently 
demanded a formal class dictatorship for the achievement of 
socialism.33 Lenin was chancing his arm intellectually. He declared, 
as if the point was self-evident, that Marx failed to demand the 
disenfranchisement of the Parisian middle classes in 1871 only because 
an exodus of them from the capital had already occurred. 34 This was 
sheer speculation; and, if a calmer consideration of the texts of Marx 
and Engels had been imposed on Lenin, he would have lost the debate 
through his over-statements and distortions. 
Presumably he calculated that his tirades would distract from his 
weaknesses in logic and substance. The polemic had started at full blast 
on the opening pages. Utopian menace was conveyed by language 
owing much to the German aggregations of Hegel and Marx and by an 
intolerance reminiscent of Luther, Calvin or Torquemada: 'The 
working class cannot realise its worldwide-revolutionary aim without 
 Closing the Circle 
35 
waging a merciless war with this renegacy, lack of character, servility to 
opportunism and unparalleled theoretical vulgarisation of Marxism.'35 
The strongest sections of the booklet lie with Lenin's demonstration 
that Kautsky had expunged the arguments for violent revolution and 
dictatorship from his presentation of Marxism. These were merely a 
starker repetition of The State and Revolution. Weakness was most 
remarkable in Lenin's replies to Kautsky's comments on Lenin himself. 
Lenin's evasiveness was considerable. His first ploy was to claim that 
Kautsky idealised 'bourgeois democracy'. Kautsky had allegedly 
forgotten about the repression of striking workers in the USA and 
overlooked the secret methods of diplomacy among the imperialist 
powers.36 This charge was unfair. Kautsky had always claimed that the 
existing freedoms of capitalist states needed to be widened and 
deepened.37 Lenin was being hypocritical, too, inasmuch as his security 
troops had recently fired on crowds of workers and his diplomats had 
made unpublicised deals with the German emperor. His assurance that 
Sovnarkom's regulations on freedom of assembly were 'a million times 
more democratic' than those of capitalist governments was cant. 38 He 
was being so outrageous because he wanted to influence socialist 
opinion in western and central Europe. Proletarian Revolution and 
Kautsky the Renegade was quickly translated and dispatched abroad. 
Lenin pretended that things were happier in Soviet Russia than 
Kautsky rightly contended. But this distortion of reality was not 
undertaken exclusively in the interests of the international communism. 
Lenin was also writing for his own Bolsheviks. They knew the reality of 
'Soviet power'. They had suppressed soviets and labour organisations 
which had turned against Bolshevism. If any of them had doubts about 
official policies, Lenin's booklet was meant to dispel them. Any 
rhetorical device was acceptable in this cause. 
For instance, Kautsky indicated that the social trends in advanced 
capitalist societies were moving away from a neat polarisation between 
'the proletariat' and 'the bourgeoisie'. Intermediate groups were 
becoming a substantial segment of the population, and the working 
class did not constitute the majority of any country. Consequently a 
'dictatorship of the proletariat' in Germany would be a dictatorship by 
a social minority.39 Lenin's retort was devious. He correctly claimed 
that not even The State and Revolution had explicitly demanded the 
disenfranchisement of the middle classes in all countries: 'And now it 
must be said that the question of the limitation of the suffrage is 
national-specific and is not a general question of dictatorship.'40 Lenin 
omitted to add that the same work had urged the investment of all 
 36 
Lenin: A Political Life 
authority in class-based mass organisations which refused membership 
and participation to 'the bourgeoisie'. 
He also entirely neglected to confront the implications of the 
sociology adduced by Kautsky. The inevitable bipartition of capitalist 
societies into two separate classes, the proletariat and the bourgeoisie, 
remained axiomatic for him. His booklet, like The State and 
Revolution, was a believer's exegesis. Kautsky had posed a substantive 
question: why did prudence require the disenfranchisement of a 
Russian bourgeoisie which by Lenin's own acknowledgement was 
weak? Lenin replied only with another question, asking whether 
Kautsky had forgotten that Marx and Engels had asserted that 
societies were run to the benefit of their ruling classes.41 Similarly 
Kautsky queried the sense of a 'transition to socialism' in Russia on the 
premise that a European socialist revolution was imminent. What if 
such a revolution, as the Mensheviks had asked in 1917, did not occur? 
What were the signs that this revolution was within sight? Lenin's 
response gave no substantive exposition, but complained that Kautsky 
had broken with Marxism since a belief in the dawn of socialism as 
being nigh was a contemporary Marxist commonplace.42 Lenin 
inconsequentially declared that the Bolsheviks had never offered a 
precise schedule for revolution in Europe.43 Kautsky also denounced 
the Bolshevik party's dispersal of the Constituent Assembly. Lenin 
replied that throughout 1917 he had declared that soviets represented a 
higher type of representative political institution than the Assembly.44 
This was an accurate account of his past statements. But it evaded 
Kautsky's other charge that the Bolsheviks had generally given the 
impression that they were committed to abiding by the results of the 
Constituent Assembly elections.45 
Lenin sustained his haranguing rhetoric to the end of his booklet. 
Kautsky naively expected to end world wars without the need for 
socialist revolutions.46 Kautsky had become stupid; he could not 
understand that the equalisation of peasant landholdings was not 
economically regressive since, in the long term, it would allow the 
peasants to aggregate themselves into ever larger units of production.47 
Kautsky was disingenuous in criticising the Bolsheviks for imposing a 
dictatorship of the proletariat upon a largely agrarian country; he knew 
very well that the Bolsheviks aimed at an alliance of the urban workers 
with the rural poor.48 
Proletarian Revolution and Kautsky the Renegade made and makes 
dispiriting reading for anyone not already an enthusiastic Leninist. The 
brighter side of The State and Revolution, such as it was, had virtually 
 Closing the Circle 
37 
disappeared. Offered as a review of Kautsky's booklet, Lenin's 
chapters in reality evaded the points made by both Kautsky and 
Martov in recent months. For example, Lenin did not consider the 
demographic shifts in advanced capitalist countries or the possibility 
that workers themselves might have different aspirations and interests. 
He offered no theory of politics in industrial states. Parties, pressure 
groups, organisational hierarchies, inter-institutional rivalries - which 
were raised as problems by Kautsky in particular- were overlooked.49 
He did not even mention terror despite its widening application in 
Soviet-occupied areas. Here a comparison with Trotski is apposite. 
Trotski announced that intense political conflicts inevitably involve 
recourse to terrorist methods. This, as he stated in his shamelessly-
entitled booklet Terrorism and Communism, had occurred in both the 
English and American Civil Wars. Trotski asserted that the Bolsheviks 
were merely following precedents.50 But Lenin wanted to practise 
terror without theoretical justification or political advertisement. His 
own booklet was an intellectually thin, self-serving piece of propaganda 
without the few insights that his forays into political science had 
displayed in 1917. The leader of Bolshevism had withdrawn into a 
mental stockade whence he never emerged.51 
TERROR 
The attempt on Lenin's life left him poorly for some weeks. A bullet 
was removed from his side; the one which was lodged in his skull was 
thought too dangerous to touch. He had had a lucky escape. The 
person who fired the shot had come within inches of killing him. He 
could not return to political meetings until 16 September 1918- and 
then only briefly.52 Meanwhile the All-Russian Central Executive 
Committee called for reprisals to be taken against the regime's enemies 
on the day of the shooting. Pravda even implied that the bourgeoisie as 
a class should be exterminated, and Zinoviev repeated the suggestion in 
Petro grad. 53 
Social echelons higher than the bourgeoisie had gone unmentioned 
by Lenin; but, out of public sight, he had been scrutinising them. 
Nikolai II and the Imperial family had been moved around the country 
since the February Revolution of 1917. On 30 April 1918 they were 
transferred to the Ipatev House outside Ekaterinburg in the Urals.54 
What to do with the former Emperor was a recurrent question among 
leading Bolsheviks. As the regime's military encirclement and political 
 38 
Lenin: A Political Life 
isolation increased, discussions became frantic. Trotski fancied a show 
trial in Moscow; he felt that the Bolsheviks should repeat and improve 
upon the judicial proceedings mounted against Louis XVI in Paris in 
1793.55 Sverdlov told the Central Committee on 19 May 1918 that a 
definitive decision was needed about 'what to do with Nikolai'.56 
Exactly what was decided, and when it was decided, has not yet come 
to light. But a contingency plan was indubitably worked out,57 and 
liaison about it between the Central Committee and Ekaterinburg was 
maintained through Urals Regional Committee members Filipp 
Goloshchekin and G. V. Safarov. Goloshchekin visited the capital at 
the start of July,58 Meanwhile Sverdlov continued to report to central 
state bodies on developments. 59 Both he and Lenin worried lest the 
anti-Bolshevik forces, at least those which were not led by socialists,60 
might seek to restore the Romanovs to their throne. A telegram came 
from Safarov and Goloshchekin on 16 July, which informed the 
Moscow and Petrograd party leadership that the military situation in 
the Urals had worsened for the Bolsheviks. The request was made to 
implement the detailed arrangements made by Goloshchekin on his 
earlier trip to Moscow.61 Almost certainly this form of words was a 
demand for permission to put the contingency plan into effect and kill 
the Romanovs. In the early hours of 17 July, the functionaries of party 
and soviet in the Urals woke the Imperial family from their beds, 
hustled them to a convenient room in the Ipatev House and shot 
them.62 
Lenin kept his distance from this act of terror. The pretence was 
maintained by Sverdlov that the central authorities had merely been 
informed about the shooting after it had taken place.63 Lenin did not 
even comment on the event: through to the end of the year he worried 
lest the peasants might turn against Sovnarkom as a government of 
regicides. 64 But the extermination of the Romanovs was to his political 
liking; and, on a more personal plane, he can hardly have forgotten that 
it had been Nikolai Il's father who had signed the death warrant of 
Lenin's older brother Aleksandr in 1887. He had never had qualms 
about terrorist methods if he deemed them pragmatically useful. 65 Nor 
did he demur from the inauguration, in his absence, by Sovnarkom on 5 
September of a Red Terror. The decree was occasioned by the attempt 
on his life; it was signed by People's Commissar of Justice D. I. Kurski 
and People's Commissar of Internal Affairs G.l. Petrovski.66 The fact 
that Moisei Uritski was assassinated in Petrograd on the same day as 
Lenin was wounded in Moscow strengthened the suspicion among 
Bolsheviks that a co-ordinated terrorist campaign was in process.67 
 Closing the Circle 
39 
The Red Terror led to the summary execution of perhaps as many as 
1300 prisoners at the hands of the Petrograd Cheka.68 Bloodletting on 
a vast scale occurred across the country. Prisons were emptied as 
prisoners were arbitrarily put against the wall and shot. The 
institutional tussle between the Cheka and the People's Commissariat 
of Justice temporarily ceased since Kurski as Justice Commissar had 
co-signed the decree on terror. Dzierzynski's deputy Martyn Latsis 
urged his subordinates to take a horrendously simple approach to class 
struggle in November 1918: 'We are not waging war on indiviudal 
persons. We are exterminating the bourgeoisie as a class. During the 
investigation, do not look for evidence that the accused acted in deed 
or word against Soviet power. The first questions you ought to put are: 
to what class does he belong? What is his origin? What is his education 
or profession? And it is these questions that ought to determine the fate 
of the accused. '69 Dzierzynski was not as categorical; but as late as 
May 1920 he called openly for 'the terrorisation, arrests and 
extermination of enemies of the revolution on the basis of their class 
affiliation or of their pre-revolutionary roles'.70 The number of such 
abuses is as yet unascertained. Countless killings happened, and some 
were accompanied by physical torture. The Bolsheviks ofNolinsk went 
so far as to offer a description and justification of gruesome methods of 
torment in order to terrify the local residents into submission.71 
The summons to torture was distasteful even to the Central 
Committee, and a political commission was established on 25 October 
1918 to oversee the Cheka's work. Its members were Lev Kamenev, 
Iosif Stalin and D. I. Kurski.72 This was a significant choice. Kurski 
had gained second breath on the issue of the Red terror. As Justice 
Commissar, he wanted to curtail the Cheka's power in favour of his 
own Commissariat. Kamenev was appalled by the rapid extension of 
Dzierzynski's powers. He led a small group of Bolshevik leaders in 
Moscow who questioned whether the Cheka should be allowed to kill 
the people it arrested without handing them over for due investigation 
and trial. Stalin was the commission's only member who could be 
expected to provide Dzierzynski with unconditional support: he had 
sent a telegram immediately after the attempt on Lenin's life 
demanding 'open mass systematic terror against the bourgeoisie and 
its agents'.73 
But Stalin was not in a minority among the most influential members 
of the Central Committee. Lenin had given Dzierzynski firm support in 
the past and did not withhold it after August 1918. He chose 7 
November, the day of celebration of the October Revolution (after the 
 40 
Lenin: A Political Life 
change of calendar from the Julian to the Georgian), to address 
Chekists: 'What surprises me in the wailing about the mistakes of the 
Cheka is the inability to place the question in a larger perspective. Here 
they are picking on the Cheka's individual mistakes, sobbing and 
fussing about them.'74 A carte blanche was written out for continued 
excesses. Lenin had been doing this privately before the assassination 
attempt. Until midsummer he had joked approvingly about the need 
for a policy of social extermination to Isaak Steinberg, a Left Socialist 
Revolutionary and People's Commissar of Justice at the time. But 
Lenin and Dzierzynski were held in check by Left Socialist-
Revolutionary inhibitions about expanding the range of arbitrary 
violence. The schism between the Bolsheviks and the Left Socialist 
Revolutionaries freed Lenin's hands in practice. On 26 June, he had 
written bluntly to Petrograd: 'Comrade Zinoviev! Only today we have 
heard in the Central Committee that the workers in Petrograd wanted 
to respond to the murder of Volodarski with mass terror and that you 
(not you personally but the Central Committee and City Committee 
leaders in Petrograd) restrained them. I assertively protest! We are 
compromising ourselves: we threaten mass terror even in the 
resolutions of the Soviet, but when it comes to action, we put a brake 
on the revolutionary and entirely correct initiative of the masses. This is 
im-pos-sible!'75 
It was Lenin's understanding that the mayhem wreaked upon certain 
social classes regardless of the attitudes of individual members of those 
classes would give a salutary lesson that the Soviet authorities meant 
business. Failure to undertake a Red terror would only encourage the 
Whites to undertake theirs: 'The terrorists will think us wet rags.'76 
Lenin wanted to get his retaliation in first. Uncontrolled carnage on a 
class-based premise was desirable. It was a necessary weapon of the 
dictatorship of the proletariat. Lenin had belonged in his youth to 
Russian populist groups espousing terrorism. His brother had been 
hanged as a terrorist. He had eulogised terror in 1905 as a highly 
desirable means of expunging counter-revolution. He had sketched, 
briefly, the possibilities of its use in 1917; and, after the October 
Revolution, he had installed a terror apparatus. By mid-1918 his itch to 
go further was ungoverned. 
He was not alone. Zinoviev, after his reprimand by Lenin for being a 
softy, pushed for a reinforcement of the Cheka in Petrograd.77 Stalin 
was to load hundreds of ex-Imperial officers in the Red Army on the 
Southern front on to a barge on the river Volga with the intention of 
drowning them. Only a last-minute telegram from Moscow prevented 
 Closing the Circle 
41 
their death.78 Trotski was not much gentler. His method of restoring 
morale to panicking troops facing the Czechoslovak legion was to 
introduce exemplary executions; he was also impatient with those who 
interceded on behalf of persons threatened by the Cheka (unless they 
happened to be potentially useful commanders for the Red Army).79 
Stalin and Trotski made Lenin seem almost benign. He regularly wrote 
to the Cheka about politically harmless individuals who came to his 
attention.80 A particular engineer or writer or civil servant might 
emerge blinking to the light of day, after languishing for months in 
prison, because of Lenin's recommendation. Yet this was justice by 
whim, and was recognised for what it was by Kamenev. The problem 
was that Kamenev was outnumbered in the inner counsels of the 
Bolshevik central party leadership. Only Bukharin agreed with him. 
Pravda, edited by Bukharin, carried a number of critical articles in late 
1918. M.S. Olminski was especially hostile to the Cheka. But 
Dzierzynski continued to protect his apparatus and his personnel 
with success. Russia was awash with the blood of the Cheka's victims.81 
Kamenev saw that the key to a reversal of policy lay with getting 
Lenin to change his mind. The struggle was fought out in the Central 
Committee. This resulted in a minor victory for the anti-Cheka 
Bolsheviks: the Cheka had previously gloried in its licence to ignore 
other institutions. The principle came into usage that the organs of 
repression should be subordinate to regular supervision by the party. 
Changes were to be debated in the Central Committee and its inner 
subcommittees. 82 
Yet it was Dzierzynski who, on 2 October 1918, was asked to draw 
up a draft code for the Cheka. 83 Kamenev fought back; and, by the 
turn of the year, he was making some progress with Lenin. On 4 
February 1919 the Central Committee determined that the function of 
sentencing and execution should be transferred from the Cheka to 
revolutionary tribunals.84 Bukharin was appointed as a kind of 
political watchdog over the Cheka's central activities.85 This was 
hardly a reversion to due judicial process. Bukharin as an individual 
could not be acquainted with all abuses, and arbitrary, hasty decisions 
remained intrinsic to the Bolshevik party's policy. Terror was modified, 
not abolished. Lenin's speeches were peppered with exculpations of the 
Cheka. Dzierzynski secured his support in expanding its official powers 
again (and there had in any case been little change in practice). On 11 
June 1919 the Central Committee re-equipped the Cheka with the right 
to investigate and execute a range of offenders from armed 
insurrectionaries to cocaine-dealers. 86 Dzierzynski had requested that 
 42 
Lenin: A Political Life 
fraudsters in the state administration and the families of persons found 
to have gone over the Whites ought also to be subject to summary 
execution by his officials. The Central Committee baulked only at the 
inclusion of the families of those joining the Whites. Kamenev's short 
campaign was resisted.87 
Under Lenin's protection the terror proceeded undisturbed in the 
Civil War. He had no more harmonious relationship with any other 
central party leader than with Dzierzynski. Trotski, Stalin and 
Kamenev all gave him occasional problems. Dzierzynski was at pains 
to consult Lenin on his schemes (and Kamenev's opposition made 
Dzierzynski ask frequently for formal sanction for the Cheka's 
methods and plans).811 Thus on 26 November 1919 he requested that 
a secret instruction should be granted for the organisation of a new 
Red mass terror - as if such a terror was not in continuous operation. 
The Central Committee declined to comply.119 
Perhaps Lenin for once refused to support him adequately on this 
occasion. But the tension between Lenin and Dzierzynski, if it existed, 
was negligible. Apparently Lenin felt that the Cheka's affairs were best 
handled between them rather more informally. A minimum of open 
discussion was required. Such documentation as has become available 
indicates how deeply Lenin involved himself. His imaginativeness as an 
overseer of terror was considerable. At a governmental meeting in 
August 1920 he passed the following note to a colleague: 'A beautiful 
plan. Finish it off together with Dzierzynski. Disguised as 'Greens' (and 
we'll pin this on them subsequently), we'll advance for I 0-20 versts and 
hang the kulaks, priests, landowners. The prize: 100,000 roubles for 
every man hanged.'90 The Greens were small rural groups of fighters 
who resisted both the Reds and Whites in the Civil War, and they 
functioned in their native areas. Lenin wanted mass killings to take 
place while shielding the Reds from guilt. The official figures on deaths 
at the hands of the Cheka in 1918-1920 are derisively small: 12,733. The 
real number may never be known. Some estimates would put it as high 
as 30,000.91 The extent of the Cheka's effectiveness in intimidating 
actual and potential opposition in the Red-occupied areas can only be 
surmised. 
But Kamenev had a point in arguing that a licentious gang of 
Chekists in each town was not the exclusive and indispensable way to 
secure acquiescence. Was Lenin acting exclusively out of an intellectual 
conviction that the Revolution itself would expire unless protected by 
mass terror? He had personal experience of the Cheka's arbitrariness. 
For his own cousin, the lawyer Viktor Ardashev, was butchered in 
 Closing the Circle 
43 
Ekaterinburg in mid-1918 despite innocence of any charges laid against 
him. Lenin enquired about his whereabouts too late to save him.92 But 
not even deaths in his own family deflected Lenin from his policy; and, 
consciously or not, he even relished the violence. His instructions to the 
Penza Bolshevik leaders on II August 1918 are testimony to this: 
'Hang no fewer than a hundred well-known kulaks, rich-bags and 
blood-suckers (and be sure that the hanging takes place in full view of 
the people).' He wanted to terrorise the rich, but also to intimidate the 
very people in whose name he had seized power. For the sake of clarity 
he added: 'Do it so that for hundreds of kilometres around the people 
might see, might tremble!'93 In October 1919, when Petrograd was 
under threat from White General Yudenich, his plan as proposed to 
Trotski had been more straightforward but still grimmer: 'If the attack 
is begun, is it impossible to mobilise another 20 thousand Petrograd 
workers plus I 0 thousand members of the bourgeoisie, set up cannons 
behind them, shoot a few hundred of them and obtain a real mass 
impact upon Yudenich?'94 
WAR AND ARMISTICE 
As violence increased in Russia, it was about to decline in the rest of 
Europe. The Great War was reaching its climax. The Bolsheviks were 
distant spectators: nothing they did after the Brest-Litovsk treaty of 
March 1918 directly affected the outcome; Russia had withdrawn from 
the Eastern front. Yet there was an indirect impact. The German high 
command, after the treaty's signature, could transfer dozens of 
divisions to fight the British and French forces. Summer on the 
Western front was recognised by Ludendorff and Hindenburg as the 
final trial of strength. Military morale was still high among the German 
commanders and their troops. 
Political confidence remained high among the Bolsheviks about the 
international situation; their conviction that European socialist 
revolution was inevitable was undimmed. The Brest-Litovsk treaty 
had been signed only because the German, French, Austrian, Italian 
and British popular insurrections against capitalism had been 
'delayed'. Lenin had been Jess taken aback by the postponement than 
any of his colleagues except for Iosif Stalin; for he had often warned 
since 1914 that the epoch of European socialist revolution might 
involve a series of wars, both international and civil, stretching over 
 44 
Lenin: A Political Life 
many years. There might also be a Second World War (and here his 
glacial intellect was perceptive in contrast with the rhetoric of 
politicians proclaiming that the Great War would be the last war of 
any kind).95 The problem was that no one could predict when socialist 
revolutions in Europe would occur. Ever since the October Revolution 
Lenin had impressed upon his party that a precise schedule could not 
be formulated. In his open letter to 'American workers' on 20 August 
1918, he went further: 'We take a gamble on the inevitability of 
international revolution but this does not mean that we are so stupid as 
to place a stake on the inevitability of revolution within a definite short 
time. '96 This was a phrasing he never repeated. He had implied that 
European socialist revolution was something that he hoped for but 
could not guarantee. Probably it was clumsy, hasty writing rather than 
deliberate reflection. Everything else written by him around this time 
demonstrated a continuing faith in revolution across the continent. 
He would have had a harder time keeping his party to toe the line of 
Brest-Litovsk if the Civil War had not monopolised its energies in the 
latter months of 1918. The German summer offensive on the Western 
front was turning into defeat. The Allies took Peronne on I September, 
St Quentin on 2 October and the great industrial city of Lille on 17 
October. Already on 4 October the German government enquired 
about terms for a possible armistice. The Kiel naval garrison mutinied 
on 28 October; but, although the army's discipline held out, 
Ludendorff and Hindenburg advised the Kaiser that surrender was 
inevitable. Wilhelm II abdicated on 9 November and a German 
republic was proclaimed. An armistice came into effect on II 
November.97 
These world-changing events made no appearance on the Bolshevik 
Central Committee agenda-sheet through to the end of the year.98 
There was no decline of interest in Germany; but Lenin and his 
colleagues could not be certain, at least until the first week of 
November, that the German military machine was irreparably harmed 
and incapable of turning its power against Moscow. Communications 
between Moscow and Berlin were fragile. Few visitors got through 
from Germany, and newspapers arrived often with several days' delay. 
The main channel was through the Berlin office of Soviet representa-
tive Adolf Joffe; and his correspondence with Lenin and People's 
Commissar Georgi Chicherin was the source of the Kremlin's 
information.99 Lenin was unconvinced that Joffe had a proper 
mastery over the necessary detail. 100 Constantly he urged him in 
Berlin, as well as Berzins in Berne and Vorovski in Stockholm, to spare 
 Closing the Circle 
45 
no expense to bring about revolution abroad. 101 The problem was the 
absence of a large communist organisation in Germany. Lenin saw the 
Spartakusbund, which was a splinter group of the old German Social-
Democratic Party led by Rosa Luxemburg and Karl Liebnecht, as the 
likeliest ally; and Joffe was instructed to start talks with them on 20 
September. 102 These far-left socalists were vital to the international 
strategy of Bolshevism. The struggle against Karl Kautsky had to be 
reinforced. Lenin wrote impatiently to Sverdlov on I October: 'Things 
have so "accelerated" in Germany that we too must not fall behind 
them. But today we have already fallen behind.' Statements on policy 
had to be prepared very quickly. Lenin sensed that a German October 
could follow the Russian October of the previous year: 'The 
international revolution has got nearer over the past week to such an 
extent that account has to be taken of it as an event of the days 
immediately ahead.' 103 
As opportunities increased in Berlin, Lenin demanded theoretical 
clarity. He badgered Joffe and Berzins to secure publication of a 
German edition of The State and Revolution. Simultaneously he 
demanded that new items by Kautsky and Martov on Marxism, on 
Bolshevik ideas and on dictatorship should be forwarded to him. 104 
Lenin was as game as ever for doctrinal disputation, and upbraided 
Joffe for alleged lethargy: 'We should be playing the role of a bureau 
for work with ideas of an international character, but we're doing 
nothing!' 105 It was comic of Lenin to think that his abstruse treatise 
would make much impact on politics in Berlin. Yet in this instance he 
was not searching for a mass readership. He especially wanted to win 
over Rosa Luxemburg and other far-left thinkers to his own variant of 
Marxism; and he assumed that a broad political movement could 
quickly be formed if they joined his side. 
Lenin meant business. On I October he wrote confidentially to 
Sverdlov and Trotski in his staccato style: 'No alliances either with 
Wilhelm's government or with a government of Wilhelm II + Ebert 
and the other scoundrels. But we are beginning to get ready a fraternal 
alliance, grain, military assistance for the German working masses, for 
the German labouring millions now that they have started up with their 
own spirit of indignation (which as yet is only a spirit). All of us shall 
give our lives in order to help the German workers in the cause of 
advancing the revolution that has begun in Germany.' 106 His words 
repay scrutiny. A Soviet republic that had a serious shortfall in food 
supplies was being expected by its leading politician to feed a foreign 
working class. A 'tenfold' intensification of requisitioning was 
 46 
Lenin: A Political Life 
anticipated by him. 107 Thus the Russian peasant was to give sustenance 
to both the Russian and the German worker. At the same time Lenin 
urged that the Red Army should increase the dimensions of 
conscription 'tenfold'. Accordingly there should be three million 
troops under Trotski's control by spring 1919. Such plans were tied 
by him explicitly to the tasks of the 'international workers' 
revolution'. 108 Brest-Litovsk was but a temporary suspension of his 
rage to spread his variant of socialism abroad. Peasant revolts against 
the Soviet authorities were a serious problem in late 1918; but Lenin 
was willing to take the risk of further alienating his rural population by 
requisitioning and conscribing peasants ever more intensively. 
At last he could throw off restraint. In October he had signed a 
financial deal with the German government for the delivery of 80,000 
tons of coal to Russia; 109 and, in return, he ensured that the Bolsheviks 
of Ukraine did not try to attack the German troops. 110 The Kaiser's 
abdication led to the formation of a provisional government under 
right-wing social-democrats Friedrich Ebert and Philipp Scheidemann; 
it also included representatives from the Independent German Social-
Democratic Party, which had been founded in 1917 by Karl Kautsky 
and Hugo Haase in disgust at the German Social-Democratic Party's 
support of the Kaiser. To Lenin it seemed that the developments in 
Germany in the November were a compressed version of what had 
happened over several months after the February Revolution of 1917 
in Petro grad. A seizure of power by the left-wing socialist radicals was 
consequently to be encouraged. Sovnarkom regarded the treaty of 
Brest-Litovsk as a dead letter. It also discarded its supplementary 
obligations as agreed with the German government on 27 August 
1918 .. 11 
Lenin spoke on Germany for all his colleagues engaged in the Civil 
War or in other political duties. 112 For him, the collapse of the Kaiser's 
military and political power proved that the Bolsheviks had been right 
to overthrow Aleksandr Kerenski's cabinet and inaugurate the epoch 
of European socialist revolution. 113 Towards the end of December 
1918 Lenin scribbled a note to Chicherin as People's Commissar of 
External Affairs suggesting that the time had come to found a new 
International, the Third International, which would replace the Second 
International which - in Lenin's repeated description - had betrayed 
socialism when most of its member parties had voted war credits to 
their respective governments in 1914. The long-proclaimed intention to 
create an alternative left-wing radical organisation was to be fulfilled. 
Lenin disclaimed personal or chauvinistic purposes. The founding 
 Closing the Circle 
47 
Congress, he proposed, could be held 'in Berlin (openly) or in Holland 
(secretly), let's say by I. ii. 1919' 114 He was buoyed up by the 
intimations of further revolutionary upheaval. The Kiel mutineers 
were still in revolt. A Soviet (or Rat) of Workers' and Soldiers' 
Deputies was created in Berlin. Radical shop stewards became 
influential amongst the workers in the great factories. Rosa Luxem-
burg and Karl Liebknecht had been released from prison some weeks 
before Wilhelm Il's abdication: Lenin welcomed them as future 
comrades in the cause of the Third International and European 
socialist revolution. 
The hand he extended to the Spartakists was surprising in the light of 
past disputes. Liebknecht, while being motivated by ideas, was not an 
original writer. Luxemburg by contrast was a fertile theorist and 
propagandist, and her strategy for revolution differed significantly 
from Lenin's. Before the Great War she had clashed with him over his 
prescriptions for clandestine socialist parties, over his emphasis on 
leadership and hierarchy, over what she described as an under-
estimation of the potentiality of the 'masses'. She had also criticised 
Lenin's nationality policy on the grounds that is conceded too much to 
nationalist aspiration; and with equal fervour she ridiculed his positive 
attitude to the capacity of the peasantry to help to advance the cause of 
socialism. 115 
These divergences between Lenin and Luxemburg did not cease in 
1917. She continued from her prison cell to have her doubts about the 
October Revolution. Like the Left Communists in Russia, she regarded 
Brest-Litovsk as a betrayal of international socialism which would 
hamper the making of socialist revolution in Germany. 116 She also 
detested the dictatorial bent of Bolshevism. Universal-suffrage 
elections, she believed, were intrinsic to the values of socialism; and 
Bolshevik repression, including terror, was a disgraceful mistake. 117 
Nor did Luxemburg warm to the Decree on Land announced by Lenin 
on 26 October 1917. Her feeling was that the redistribution of 
agricultural land among peasant households was economically 
regressive inasmuch as the average size of units of production would 
be reduced. 118 She retained her objections on release from prison. 
While Lenin hoped that the Spartakists would form a German 
Communist Party, Luxemburg wished - if a new party was to be 
formed - to call it the German Socialist Party so as to dissociate herself 
fully from the communist Lenin. When the matter was discussed by her 
comrades on 30-31 December, she and Leo Jogiches were outvoted. 119 
The German Communist Party came into existence. Even so, she strove 
 48 
Lenin: A Political Life 
to prevent the inauguration of the Third International for fear of 
excessive influence being exerted by the Bolsheviks. Once again she was 
outvoted; but she ensured that Hugo Eberlein, the German Communist 
Party's delegate to the meeting of communist and pro-communist 
organisations projected by Lenin in Petrograd, was mandated to make 
only minimal concessions to the Bolsheviks. 120 
Luxemburg and Liebknecht would have made uncomfortable 
political partners for Lenin. The faultiness of information about them 
in late 1918 presumably caused him to drop his ideological guard. He 
continued to assume, as he had in 1917, that his disagreements with 
them were trivial in comparison with his agreements. He had always 
found it easier to make compromises with rival socialists abroad than 
with those he encountered in the Russian empire. If Luxemburg had 
been operating in Russia rather than Germany, she would have been 
under arrest as a subversive. The German Right took the same attitude. 
A rising against the Berlin authorities was organised by the German 
communists on 6 January 1919. Gustav Noske summoned the police 
and the demobilised anti-socialist veterans known as the Freikorps to 
defend the government. Luxemburg thought the rising premature and 
dangerous. But Noske's soldiers sought her and Liebknecht out. They 
were murdered on 15 January. The rising was bloodily suppressed. 
Jogiches, too, was killed a few days later. 
Lenin treated them as heroes in death. In February he supported a 
scheme to bring out editions of the complete works of Luxemburg and 
Liebknccht. 121 He mentioned them only in the most reverential terms 
in public. There is no evidence that Lenin's attitude was not genuine. 
He had pinned his strategical expectations, even after Brest-Litovsk, 
upon a successful far-left socialist revolution in Berlin, and he had long 
recognised that Luxemburg and Liebknecht were its likeliest leaders. 
He may well also have believed that such disagreements as he had with 
Luxemburg- insofar as he was acquainted with her position- were not 
insurmountable. Ever the optimist, he probably believed that he could 
pull her round to his policies on organisation, dictatorship, national 
self-determination and the peasants. Be that as it may, the murder of 
Luxemburg and Liebknecht removed a problem that would have 
attended the creation of the Third International. Furthermore, the 
suppression of the Berlin Rising ruled out any thought of holding its 
First Congress in Germany. Instead it would be held in Moscow. Lenin 
had been urging German far-left socialists to take power; but the sheer 
amateurism of the Berlin rising, furthermore, must have convinced him 
that an injection of Bolshevik practicality was vital to a healthy 
 Closing the Circle 
49 
revolutionary movement in central Europe. A further stage in the self-
assertion of Bolshevism, its achievements and merits, was heralded. 122 
REDS AND WHITES 
Among the faults of the Spartakists had been their lack of organisation 
and preparation and their underestimation of the forces ranged against 
them; and Lenin was right to highlight them. With no greater excuse he 
failed to anticipate the abrupt transformation in the Russian Civil War 
in the last two months of 1918. The earlier fighting had been mainly 
between armies subordinate to two socialist administrations: the 
Sovnarkom of the Bolsheviks and the Komuch of the Socialist 
Revolutionaries. Trotski and the Red Army had pushed Komuch out 
of Samara. But then yet another military menace revealed itself: the 
White army of Admiral Kolchak. His officers abhorred socialism, 
aiming to restore the social and economic order prevailing before 1917. 
They were based in the Siberian city of Omsk, and planned to invade 
central Russia. 
Lenin admitted how shaken he was in a telegram to Trotski on 13 
December 1918: 'The news from near Perm is extremely alarming. 
Danger threatens it. I fear that we've forgotten about the Urals.' 123 
Kolchak had seized power in Siberia on 17 November. Previously he 
had been in uneasy alliance with the Komuch administration when it 
fled from the Volga region. But he quickly rid himself of them. 
Socialist-Revolutionary leaders in Siberia were arrested. In the 
territory under Kolchak's control a violent restoration of industrialists 
and bankers began; and he even expropriated the legally-owned land of 
local peasants on behalf of landlords whose land was located 
elsewhere. 124 Bolsheviks and active trade unionists were executed. 
This was counter-revolution with a vengeance. Meanwhile General 
Krasnov, the Don Cossack leader, pushed northward to the outskirts 
of Voronezh. And yet another White force established by Imperial 
officers under General Denikin - after Kornilov's death -moved upon 
the towns of the North Caucasus. His Volunteer Army was poised to 
invade central Russia the following year. The British still held 
Arkhangelsk, the French Odessa. Furthermore, Ukrainian national-
ists under Simon Petliura filled the gap left by the withdrawal of the 
German forces by proclaiming a Ukrainian People's Republic. A 
Directory was set up in Kiev. Thus the Soviet republic of Russia was 
reduced to a territory little greater than the mediaeval principality of 
 50 
Lenin: A Political Life 
Muscovy. Kolchak, styling himself as Supreme Ruler, grasped his 
chance. In a rapid movement he threw a large armed contingent at 
Perm in the central Urals. The Reds retreated in disorder on 13 
December 1918. It was the greatest shock to Bolshevik morale since the 
Czechoslovak Legion's revolt in May. Kolchak looked set to 
overthrow Lenin. 125 
Yet both the chaos of communications and the country's political 
dismemberment meant that sudden, unpredicted changes in the 
military position were inevitable. Lenin's telegram did not reproach 
Trotski or the Red Army high command. It simply recognised that the 
Bolsheviks had been caught napping. Obviously the priority was to 
reinforce the Army in the Perm direction with all possible speed; and 
Lenin, with Sverdlov as co-signatory, made just this recommendation 
when the city fell to Kolchak. 126 
Yet these verbal exchanges were confidential: Lenin refrained from 
public commentary on Kolchak in the winter of 1918-1919. 127 He paid 
the closest attention to details of strategy and personnel behind the 
scenes. Even so, he did not treat the emergence of Kolchak and 
Denikin as a heaven-sent opportunity for propaganda. To be taken 
unawares was one thing; to ignore the possibility of enhancing the 
regime's popularity was quite another. The explanation as yet must be 
speculative. The suggestion that he was altogether too busy with his 
administrative duties is discountable since he made several speeches 
and wrote articles in the months after November 1918. If he could 
discourse on Liebknecht and Luxemburg, why not also on Kolchak? It 
is possible that he did not wish to sow panic among Muscovites. But 
this is not wholly plausible. Simultaneously he was allowing a map to 
be displayed near the Kremlin indicating the exact boundaries of 
Soviet-held territory. Information about the situation on the various 
fronts was widely available. Consequently perhaps the conundrum is 
ultimately resolvable by reference to Lenin's world-view. Since 1914 he 
had rejected all attempts to make distinctions between reactionaries, 
conservatives, liberals and anti-Bolshevik socialists; his political 
universe was Manichean. Kornilov the anti-democrat, for Lenin, had 
always stood secretly behind Kerenski the democrat. 1211 Kolchak was 
simply a contemporary Kornilov. The coup against the Socialist 
Revolutionaries in Omsk made no great difference to Lenin's way of 
thinking, and he wasted scant words on it. 
On the other hand, the practical consequences of the capture of Perm 
by the Whites undoubtedly horrified him. When Kazan fell to the 
Czechoslovak Legion, Lenin and his colleagues had hardly begun to 
 Closing the Circle 
51 
reform their military and political machinery for war. Perm fell to 
Kolchak months after the taking of such measures. The Red Army and 
the civilian institutions had proved inadequate to their responsibilities. 
Further defeats occurred. The Volunteer Army under General Denikin 
took Pyatigorsk, an administrative centre in the North Caucasus, on 24 
January 1919. Days later he moved into the oil-city of Grozny. The 
Don Cossacks were meanwhile causing difficulties for the Bolsheviks 
and their Red forces in the southern cities of the Volga; and the French 
had landed their naval squadron in Odessa on the Black Sea on 18 
December 1918. When Lenin talked expectantly about the rise of 
German communism, his thoughts were a mixture of belief and and 
sheer desperation. 
It was in this awful winter for Bolshevism that, for the first and last 
time, he contemplated territorial concessions to the Russian foes of the 
Soviet state. A domestic version of Brest-Litovsk was considered. The 
occasion was the conference arranged by the Allies with all the 
combatant forces in the Russian Civil War on Prinkipo island in the 
Sea of Marmora. The call went out on 23 January 1919. Georgi 
Chicherin, People's Commissar for External Affairs, telegrammed on 4 
February that the Soviet government was willing to send representa-
tives.129 The terms approved by Lenin excluded neither the relinquish-
ing of land to the Whites nor even an acceptance of responsibility for 
debts incurred by previous Russian governments. He surrounded the 
negotiations in secrecy. Open diplomacy, which had been a Bolshevik 
objective in 1917 and to a large extent practised in the Brest-Litovsk 
discussions, had long been abandoned. Lenin wanted no repetition of 
the searing controversy he had had with the Left Communists. 
Kolchak and Denikin might know about the Prinkipo offer; the 
Bolshevik party, apart from a few Central Committee members, were 
kept in the dark. And it was the Whites, not the Reds, who refused to 
deal at Prinkipo. They were for 'Russia One and Indivisible', and in 
any case perceived that any settlement with Lenin would last only so 
long as he felt too weak to attack them. They needed no lessons on 
Lenin's wiliness and ideological commitment, and his simultaneous 
convocation of the Congress of the Communist International put the 
matter beyond doubt for them. 
The situation was less bleak for Lenin than it seemed. Ufa in the 
southern Urals was re-captured by the Reds as early as 30 December 
1918. Kolchak, having taken Perm, was over-stretched and called a 
halt to his projected advance. To the north, in Arkhangelsk, the 
expected push against the Reds never happened; internal weakness and 
 52 
Lenin: A Political Life 
the unwillingness of the British to involve themselves to a great extent 
in the Civil War induced the local leader N. V. Chaikovski to depart for 
Paris to participate instead in the peace negotiations at Versailles. 
General Krasnov was repulsed from Tsaritsyn, and his previous 
readiness to treat with the Germans forced his resignation as Don 
Cossack leader on IS February 1919. A southward thrust by Red 
forces into Ukraine, under the command of V. A. Antonov-Ovseenko, 
resulted in the seizure of Kiev. In Moscow an American emissary 
arrived, William Bullitt, to have talks in pursuit of a compromise 
between Soviet Russia and her enemies.t 30 
No Bolshevik could yet be very optimistic. In the phrase of the day, 
Central Committee members in Moscow 'were sitting on their 
suitcases' through the winter. There could be no certainty that they 
would hold Moscow against Kolchak and Denikin, and Bolshevik 
families had to be ready to flee in an emergency. In March 1919 things 
took a turn for the worse. Kolchak had re-grouped his forces. Supplies 
and advice were coming through to him from the British (whose 
representative, General Knox, stayed by his side). Kolchak's initial 
target was Ufa. In the middle of the month his troops entered the town 
in triumph. A flurry of long-distance conversations between Lenin and 
Trotski led to an agreement that the crisis on the Eastern front was too 
severe for Trotski to be able to attend the forthcoming Eighth Party 
Congress. Rumours that Kolchak would soon rule from the Kremlin 
spread round Moscow. Lenin would have been the prime quarry of the 
Whites if ever they broke their way through to the capital. Nevertheless 
both he and his wife put on a brave face in their public appearances. If 
Trotski could live under the hail of real bullets while travelling in his 
train, this was the least that Sovnarkom's chairman could do to sustain 
morale. Indeed Krupskaya insisted on taking greater physical risks 
than Lenin: in 1919 she was to board a steamship from Moscow to 
conduct propaganda at the towns and cities on the river Volga. 131 It 
was a risk that he would never have run himself. As ever, he assumed 
that everything would go to the dogs if his presence at the helm of party 
and state were not to be maintained. 
FEEDING RUSSIA 
There is a recurrent supposition that Lenin resorted to force against the 
peasantry only under the most extreme pressure of Civil War. 132 This is 
not sustainable. For, when introducing the Food Supplies Dictatorship 
 Closing the Circle 
53 
in midsummer 1918, he was still unbothered about the counter-
revolutionary armies being formed in other parts of Russia: he even 
wanted to divert the People's Commissariat of Military Affairs into 
acting as the main agency of grain collection. Obviously he did not 
think at the time that Trotski would have other tasks, such as the 
defeat of well-organised armies, to discharge. Economics, not war, 
impelled him; and he would have moved to a Food Supplies 
Dictatorship even if there had been no Czechoslovak Legion, no 
Komuch, no Kolchak, Denikin and Yudenich. Indisputably the treaty 
of Brest-Litovsk had worsened the situation. Ukraine had been lost to 
Russia. Yet official opinion was adamant that, even so, there was just 
about enough surplus grain in the villages to cover the needs of 
consumers in towns and in those parts of the countryside which 
traditionally 'imported' agricultural products. 133 Lenin took space in 
Pravda to declare: 'There is enough grain for everyone.' 134 
Yet in the same article he sounded a warning: 'Catastrophe stands 
before you, it has advanced quite, quite close.' 135 All grain stocks in the 
Soviet republic had to be obtained by the People's Commissariat of 
Food Supplies without delay, or else there would be mass starvation. 
Lenin acknowledged that already there were 'revolts by people 
tormented by hunger'.'36 To this end he determined upon drawing 
up a comprehensive official policy. The piecemeal and sometimes 
contradictory measures of early 1918, he argued, had to give way to a 
Food Supplies Dictatorship. In Lenin's opinion, the objective had to be 
the centralisation of food supplies, the unification of the proletariat 
and the formation of organs of the village poor (and this was written 
just a few days before the decree on the kombedy). 137 The policy of the 
Central Committee was summarised by him emphatically: 'This means 
that all grain surpluses belong to the state.' 138 On 4 July Sovnarkom 
assigned 10 million roubles for the creation of agricultural communes: 
the transition to socialist ownership and production was to be 
intensified. 139 But the interests of most peasants, he asserted with 
equal firmness, would be protected. At the Fifth Congress of Soviets on 
5 July he declared: 'It is untrue, and a thousand times untrue, that this 
is a struggle with the peasantry; and we don't have a disagreement with 
the middle peasants who have only infinitesimal surpluses.' 140 
On paper the achievements were substantial. By the end of 1918 
there were nearly 140,000 committees of the village poor in European 
Russia; and 7370 peasant cells of the Bolshevik party had been 
established. 3366 collective farms had been formed in the same 
provinces. And two milliard roubles of industrial goods were 
 54 
Lenin: A Political Life 
dispatched to the countryside in exchange for the grain obtained. 141 
The People's Commissariat of Food Supplies recorded its success. 
Total state procurements of grain in the financial year 1917-18 were 30 
million puds, in 1918-1919 110 million puds. It was still not enough for 
the subsistence of the population in the Red-occupied areas. 142 
Yet the auguries were not good about the peasantry's reaction. The 
typical effect of the peasant movement had been a redistribution of 
land, and the overwhelming majority of households had joined what 
Lenin would call the middling category. If it was true that the country 
had barely enough surplus grain to survive, then it stood to reason that 
'middle peasants' would have to hand over substantial grain stocks. 143 
The richer peasants known as kulaks, a diminished proportion of the 
peasantry, could not supply the entire state's needs. The People's 
Commissariat was not a sophisticated food-supplies apparatus. Even 
Lenin, supposedly the party's expert on the social and economic 
conditions of the peasantry, could define a middle peasant in highly 
general terms: 'Someone who does not sell his labour power is what we 
refer to as "middling".' 144 This was not a definition which would easily 
be applicable in the villages when the 70,000 worker members of the 
requisitioning detachments arrived on their brief and violent missions. 
Nor were the committees of the village poor very reliable. Lenin 
admitted that corruption flourished within them. 145 His own rhetoric 
did not induce the requisitioners to act cautiously. Class war on the 
kulaks was demanded. Ruthlessness; no mercy; a fight to the death: 
these were the common themes of his speeches. 146 Lenin did not want 
the middle peasants to be alienated; he said this openly, but not 
often. 147 The detachments were more impressed with the legal 
requirement that all grain surpluses were to be regarded as state 
property- and 'surpluses' were no more closely specified than 'middle 
peasants'. 
Without acknowledging his own responsibility, Lenin excoriated the 
blunder of annoying the middle peasants on 6 August 1918. But his 
comments were not made public at the time. 1411 Conferring with Food 
Supplies Commissar A. D. Tsyurupa, he finally issued an instruction 
forbidding the maltreatment of middle peasants on 18 August. 149 He 
also acted to allow middle peasants to be included in the committees of 
the village poor. 150 But the depredation of the countryside continued. 
Most peasants anyway disliked the Soviet government's attempt to 
introduce open social strife among the peasantry. The committees of 
the village poor were deeply resented; and yet nothing was done to 
restrain them. Grigori Zinoviev brought a motion before the Sixth 
 Closing the Circle 
55 
Congress of Soviets in November I 9 I 8 ratifying the transfer of much 
authority from the rural soviets to these same committees of the village 
poor. 151 But reports of the damage to the party's reputation done by 
the committees poured into Moscow. Abruptly, on 4 December I 918, a 
decree was passed over the signature of Yakov Sverdlov announcing 
their disbandment. 152 
Deeply implicated in establishing the committees, Lenin kept quiet 
about the fracas. He hated appearing either silly or apologetic; he had 
even defended the decision to increase their authority in November 
1918. 153 Yet he saw that requisitioning had to be regularised. Nowhere 
near enough industrial goods were available to get peasants to release 
their grain voluntarily, and the requisitioning agencies had inadequate 
training and guidance as to how much grain to seize in each locality. 
Sovnarkom decided on a modification of policy on I l January 1919. 
The essential ingredient was an annual total target of grain, subdivided 
into individual targets for each province. Subdivisions were to be made 
at each lower level of government. Every peasant land commune, at the 
bottom of this system of 'apportionment', was to bear collective 
responsibility for the rendering of a quota of grain. Severe sanctions 
were to be maintained for non-compliance; but the policy was designed 
to end the arbitrary despoiling of the peasantry that had occurred as 
well as to ensure that grain-deficient provinces were exempted. 154 Only 
twelve provinces entered the list of provinces to supply grain to the 
People's Commissariat of Food Supplies, and four Volga provinces 
under Bolshevik rule were expected to supply three fifths of the total. 155 
Nevertheless 260 million puds was considerably less than what was 
needed to stave off widespread malnutrition. 156 Leading Bolsheviks 
were turning to an extremely small region to victual both the Red 
Army and the urban population of 'Sovdepiya'. Mercifully for them, 
the need to rely solely on Russia was disappearing. On 3 January 1919 
the Red forces entered Kharkov in eastern Ukraine. By 5 February 
they were in Kiev. Sovnarkom's minutes are not detailed on the point; 
but it may well be that Lenin anticipated a resolution of the crisis in 
food supplies through the stocks of the Ukrainian peasantry. 
Ukraine soon entered the calculations of the People's Commissariat 
of Food Supplies. Official optimism was restored. As ever, Sovnarkom 
had only the vaguest idea as to how much grain there was in which 
province. Guessing wildly, Lenin suggested on 19 February that the 
'surpluses for the whole of the Ukraine should be defined at a 
maximum, for instance, of 500 million puds'. He urged that 'only a 
fifth or a tenth' should be taken. The rest should be left with the 
 56 
Lenin: A Political Life 
peasants for personal consumption and for the spring sowing. 157 He 
had begun to learn his lesson that the Civil War might be lost if greater 
care were not taken with the mass of the peasantry. Even so, decrees on 
the establishment of collective farms were issued in February 1919 
despite the antagonism of most peasants. 158 Urban detachments were 
ill-informed as to the definition of a middle peasant (as Lenin was told 
to his face when he addressed the Petro grad Soviet on 13 March). 1 59 
Lenin referred still to peasant revolts against the abuses of the food-
supply commissars as kulak uprisings. 160 Much as he had done to pull 
his party back from disaster, he had not pulled even himself back far 
enough. Lenin the class warrior prevailed over Lenin the peasant's 
friend. 
Meanwhile he kept up the appearance of being the protector of the 
workers. He had been wounded, and nearly killed, while addressing the 
work-force at the Mikhelson factory. But his statements lacked the 
specificity and incisiveness on industrial policy that he displayed about 
the party's measures for the countryside. Not for the first time the 
'party of the workers' had more to say about the villages than the 
towns. 161 In the meetings of the Central Committee between the Brest-
Litovsk treaty and the beginning of 1918 its agenda barely included the 
affairs of industry; and, when it did, the topics were not of primary 
significance. 162 In addition, his public pronouncements on the 
economy, beyond what he said about food supplies, were vague. 163 
He called for discipline, for one-man management, for a rise in 
productivity, for self-sacrifice in the cause of the Civil War, for support 
of the party's policies. He did not immediately give up his idea that, 
since the contemporary advanced economies before the Great War had 
been operating on a global scale, capitalists should continue to be 
invited to invest in and reinforce Russian industry. On 16 May 1918, 
Sovnarkom under his chairmanship asked for a plan to be prepared on 
'economic concessions' to be offered to private foreign companies. 164 
Lenin was implicitly giving notice that he despaired of a rapprochement 
with Russian capitalism; and now he decided, despite the country's 
international travail, to attract industrial collaboration and capital 
investment from foreigners. He repeated this demand on 20 July when 
the plan remained to be submitted. 165 Evidently his colleagues could 
see that, during the Great War, substantial participation by even 
German entrepreneurs was likely to be negligible. Lenin, too, cooled 
towards the plan; he waited until nearly the end of the Civil War before 
re-heating his commitment. 166 
 Closing the Circle 
57 
The emphasis in policy was shifted. Industrial nationalisation, which 
had been started with the October Revolution, was intensified. From 
28 June 1918 a campaign was in existence to take all large-scale 
factories and mines into the hands of the state. 167 Sovnarkom took 
decisions on particular enterprises, and many leading Bolsheviks 
believed that the party was making a major advance towards socialism. 
For the former Left Communists, the policy was yet another reason for 
abandoning opposition to Lenin; it seemed to them that their industrial 
(as well as commercial and agricultural) recommendations were at last 
being implemented. 168 A wave of ideological euphoria swept through 
the Bolshevik party as it had previously in 191 7.'69 
Lenin, while not being immune to the euphoria, pointedly refrained 
from endorsing the notion that the strengthened emphasis on industry 
was identifiable with the achievement of socialism. As Sovnarkom 
chairman, he was aware of the dire conditions in reality. It was already 
clear that the decline in industrial output was unlikely to be reversed. 
The total recorded for 1918 was down by fifty five per cent on the 
previous year. 170 Workers were fleeing the towns. The factory work-
force dropped from 2. 6 million to 1. 3 million in the same twelve 
months. 171 Fuel was becoming so scarce that Lenin contemplated the 
purchase of coal from the Germans. 172 The drastically-reduced 
industrial sector experienced a massive loss in productivity. Nor was 
this any wonder. Hunger drove workers to make articles for personal 
barter during paid working time; and the exodus of workmates into 
both the countryside and the Red Army caused further disruption. The 
anti-capitalist measures of 1917-1918, moreover, had driven owners 
and resources out of economic activity. In practice, the government's 
priority was to nationalise enterprises mainly in order to possess the 
existing stocks of manufacture. A report on progress was already 
discussed at Sovnarkom on 29 July 1918. 173 Furthermore, guarantees 
were given to workers volunteering for the Red Army that places in 
employment would be reserved for them. 174 The life-and-death struggle 
against the anti-Bolshevik armies took precedence over industrial 
reconstruction. The fate of the October Revolution hung in the 
balance. 
