 1 Merciless Retreat 
'THE CURRENT TASKS OF SOVIET POWER' 
Lenin was a mercurial mixture as a political leader. He was an 
ideologist, a class warrior and a party boss. Contradictions and 
uncertainties as well as plainly-spoken simplicities were characteristic 
of him. No wonder his career eludes easy definition. And yet such a 
persona was not without its parallels. Muhammed, prophet of Islam, 
frequently took decisions seemingly based on considerations of 
prudence; and his ideas were not without their confusion. Yet a 
believer he was. His interests and understandings were transformed as 
he registered the impact of circumstances. Another example is Oliver 
Cromwell, who constantly surprised his followers by the shifts in his 
ideas but was a man of deep Christian belief. The elusiveness of a 
Muhammed, a Cromwell or a Lenin is among the factors which enable 
them to dominate political life around them. 
Lenin, unlike Muhammed and Cromwell, made a virtue out of 
changeability. For him, a refusal to shift positions with the movement 
of history was self-defeating. Decking it out in Marxist vocabulary, he 
urged his followers to take a dialectical approach. Among his favourite 
sayings was that 'theory is grey but life is green'. He took it from Marx 
who had found it in Goethe. The changes made by the Bolsheviks in 
their policies after the October Revolution of 1917 were drastic. They 
had promised a popularly-elected government, but disbanded the 
Constituent Assembly in January 1918 when they got less than a 
quarter of the seats. They had promised the least repressive 
revolutionary regime in the annals of mankind. And yet the Cheka, 
their security police, became unprecedentedly violent and arbitrary. 
They had promised economic reconstruction. Yet both the collapse of 
industry and the disruption of trade between town and countryside 
continued. Food supplies were increasingly obtained by armed urban 
squads, and labour discipline in the factories was tightened. The 
Bolsheviks had also expected to rule a multinational state with the 
support of the non-Russian nationalities. Yet the Ukrainian and 
Georgian administrations easily mobilised forces in their own defence. 
 2 
Lenin: A Political Life 
And Lenin and his comrades had promised peace across Europe. They 
had assumed that their October Revolution would be followed, within 
weeks if not days, by insurrections against the continental capitalist 
order. Instead they had signed the treaty of Brest-Litovsk in March 
1918, disclaiming sovereignty over Ukraine and the entire Baltic 
region. 
These set-backs would have overwhelmed most governments. Public 
opinion had been prepared by Bolshevik propaganda, insofar as such 
propaganda had any effect, for a revolutionary process unmarred by 
problems. The party survived the storms of disapproval through its 
early months in office only by the skin of its teeth. Opposition sprang 
up everywhere. Socialist-Revolutionary delegates to the dispersed 
Constituent Assembly gathered in Samara by the river Volga to plan 
their return to the capital. Mensheviks in central and northern Russia 
experienced a resurgence of popularity. Officers in their thousands 
from the demobilised Imperial Army were assembling in southern 
Russia and in mid-Siberia; their objective was the overthrow of Lenin's 
regime. After the treaty of Brest-Litovsk, moreover, Russia's allies 
Britain and France sent forces to the East. British regiments landed in 
Murmansk and Archangel, the French navy docked in Odessa. The 
Japanese put troops into the Russian Far East. Nor could it be 
discounted that the Germans might rip up the Brest-Litovsk treaty and 
invade what remained of Soviet Russia. 
Sovnarkom, as Lenin's government was known, had survived for a 
number of reasons. His Decree on Land gave him credit with the 
peasants, and the Bolsheviks at least did well among the working class 
and garrison soldiers in the Constituent Assembly elections. The 
exhausting conditions of everyday life also worked in the Bolshevik 
party's favour. The energy of the regime's opponents was diminishing. 
Chaotic communications and transport were a further factor. The 
Cheka's campaign to root out opposition in the towns and cities under 
Soviet control was ruthless. Yet the Bolsheviks could not afford to be 
complacent. Lenin had not lost his faith in the inevitability of 
communism's global triumph; but he recognised the weaknesses of 
the party's position. Survival was not the same as success. Most 
peasants unsurprisingly objected to being compelled by local soviets to 
hand over grain for what they regarded as derisory compensation. A 
rising number of workers turned against the Bolsheviks. The October 
Revolution, which had been made in the name of the so-called masses, 
was losing its original social base. Every leading Bolshevik appreciated 
the acuteness of the regime's crisis. In the phrase of the day, they lived 
 Merciless Retreat 
3 
and worked while 'sitting on suitcases': they kept themselves ready, 
mentally and physically, for flight from the capital. None forgot the 
abruptness of the emperor Nikolai II's forced abdication in February 
1917 or minister-president Aleksandr Kerenski's flight from the Winter 
Palace in October. Spring 1918 had left the outcome of the Bolshevik 
party's revolutionary project undetermined. 
No Bolshevik leader was in greater danger than Lenin. In 1917 there 
had been calls in the conservative press for him to be hanged as a 
traitor to the nation. His actions since the October Revolution had 
identified him as the instigator of abuses and excesses. About his likely 
fate in the event of the Bolshevik party's overthrow there could be little 
doubt. The nastier posters of the period show him as an insidious, 
brooding figure with dark, penetrating eyes and a Star of David above 
his head. The defining of Bolshevism as a Jewish conspiracy against the 
Russian people began not in Germany but in Russia. Aside from such 
black propaganda, however, Lenin was undeniably more responsible 
than any fellow Bolshevik for the actions of his party. The timing and 
method of the seizure of power in October 1917 were largely his choice, 
and Sovnarkom's programme was mainly of his making. But Lenin 
had to live with the consequences and was in no mood to regret or 
apologise. 
As the prospect of European revolution receded, so the obligation to 
provide a short-term plan of action for his party pressed itself upon 
him. Lenin's political friends were sorely in need of guidance. The 
Party of Left Socialist Revolutionaries, which was the junior partner in 
the Soviet government, rejected the treaty of Brest-Litovsk. Nor was 
his own Bolshevik party quiescent. Bukharin and his associates, known 
as the Left Communists, detested the treaty so much that they refused 
to serve in the newly-elected Central Committee. Lenin's proposals 
took the form of a lengthy pamphlet written in the second fortnight of 
1918. Pamphleteering was his most congenial medium of communica-
tion with fellow Bolsheviks except for speeches to their Congresses. The 
calling of yet another Congress would have poisoned the wounds he 
sought to heal. No national radio service existed. Cinema facilities were 
not widely available. But Lenin was an experienced journalist and 
could write fast and, when he set his mind to it, forcefully. The result 
was The Current Tasks of Soviet Power. Lenin avoided reference to 
opponents in the Bolshevik party and mentioned the Left Socialist 
Revolutionaries only fleetingly. 1 He also largely overlooked interna-
tional questions. The Brest-Litovsk treaty, that momentous treaty 
which had ended hostilities on the Eastern front in the Great War, was 
 4 
Lenin: A Political Life 
scarcely cited. In contrast with his recent writings, the pamphlet gave 
little consideration to either Germany or the Allies. No doubt 
diplomatic calculations were at work; but the main reason why he 
desisted from his usual violent castigation of the contending imperialist 
powers was his ambition to concentrate the thoughts of his party on a 
single basic theme: political and economic policies in the former 
Russian empire. The 'breathing-space' secured by the Brest-Litovsk 
treaty was to be used to consolidate the tasks of the October 
Revolution. 
He was astonishingly casual about armed resistance to the 
Bolsheviks. The Cossack leader M.P. Bogaevski had just been 
captured and executed, and this event was adduced by Lenin as a 
sign that the phase of 'open civil war' had now passed. The country's 
peacetime reconstruction could now be inaugurated? This was so 
egregious a misprognosis that the question arises whether he meant it 
seriously. Possibly his dismissal of the potential military threat was a 
mere device to fix Bolshevik eyes on the politics and the economy. But 
this is unlikely. Lenin seldom failed to bang the war-drum when 
alarmed about the future. A Red Army was already being formed, and 
he would surely not have failed to alert his readers to its importance if 
he had not believed what he said about Bogaevski. Residing in the 
Kremlin in Moscw and hearing about events elsewhere in Russia only 
intermittently, Lenin simply blundered. 
Not that he ceased to anticipate civil war altogether. The pamphlet 
suggested that 'any great revolution, and especially a socialist one' was 
inconceivable without such a war. But he proceeded to describe civil 
war in terms of a conflict between the revolutionary administration and 
the perpetrators of 'crimes, hooliganism, bribery, speculation, abuses 
of all kinds'.3 Not counter-revolutionary armies but 'petit-bourgeois 
anarchic elementalism' held a knife to the throat of the October 
Revolution.4 The party's priority, according to Lenin, should be the 
introduction of strict account-keeping and control. 'Bribe-takers and 
scoundrels' should be shot. At present the Soviet power was 'more like 
blancmange than like iron' .5 Showing that his zeal for mass political 
participation had not faded, he urged that workers be inducted into 
state administrative responsibilities. Meetings at factory gates should 
be encouraged. Lenin's basic aim was less to create an atmosphere of 
liberation than to get labourers, skilled and unskilled, to raise their 
level of discipline and productivity.6 He was blunt: 'The Russian 
worker is a bad worker in comparison with the advanced nations.'7 
This led him to recommend the adoption of time-and-motion 
 Merciless Retreat 
5 
techniques of the American manager and writer F. W. Taylor. Before 
1917 he had castigated Taylorism routinely as yet another bourgeois 
trick to extract more labour for less wages. In Lenin's estimation, the 
occurrence of the October Revolution made Taylor's techniques 
deployable without damage to the working class's interests.8 He also 
insisted that 'bourgeois specialists' should be retained in state 
enterprises and should be rewarded above the rate for ordinary 
workers. Their expertise would be indispensable for the foreseeable 
future.9 The party should also halt the campaign for nationalisations in 
industry and commerce. Instead the objective should be to reinforce the 
changes in the economy already made. 10 
Lenin admitted that all this constituted a 'compromise', even a 
'retreat' from unbridled revolutionary optimism. But his skills as a 
propagandist were undiminished. He contrived to indicate that his 
proposals involved an advance from the methods of conquest to the 
methods of administration. 11 A competitive spirit should be fostered. 
Local political and economic organs should enter a contest with each 
other in pursuit of increased efficiency; and 'model communes' should 
receive material prizes for their achievements. 12 
Yet this was a single gentle remark in a pamphleteering tirade. His 
tone was aggressive, strident, threatening. The Lenin who in 1917 had 
publicly claimed that 'the transition to socialism' would be accom-
plishable without undue difficulty had vanished. Images of violence, 
retrenchment and self-sacrifice became recurrent. Dictatorship was 
lauded. His sole recommendation as to how workers were to be trained 
to assume tasks of responsibility in the state was to recruit them for 
service in revolutionary courts. Anyone caught breaking labour 
discipline in factory should be punished mercilessly. In other words, 
workers should repress workers without compunction. 'But our 
revolutionary courts and our popular courts,' lamented Lenin, 'are 
exceedingly, incredibly weak.' 13 What was required was the 'uncondi-
tional submission of the masses to the single will of the leader of the 
labour process'. At this point his language started to become opaque. 
He obviously intended to state that officials, administrators and 
managers should be accorded dictatorial powers as individuals; but he 
put this in jargon, demanding 'the dictatorship of particular persons/or 
definite processes of work at definite moments of purely executive 
functions'. 14 What he declared would not commend itself to all party 
comrades. But attack was preferable to defence for Lenin: 'We don't 
need hysterical outbursts. We need the measured step of the iron 
battalions of the proletariat.' 
 6 
Lenin: A Political Life 
OPPOSITION AND SURVIVAL 
The resistance was beginning to cause panic. It would be an 
exaggerated claim that, had Lenin cracked under the strain, the 
Bolsheviks would have gone under. Yet his resilience was crucial when 
his colleagues were blundering around: even Trotski and Dzierzynski 
made wholly avoidable mistakes. 15 The fervid atmosphere seemed to 
leave Lenin cool. Trotski was to record his admiration as follows: 'At 
the sharpest moments he seemed to become deaf and blind to 
everything lying beyond the boundaries of whatever interest consumed 
him.' 16 The capacity to close off his mind to distractions was 
accompanied by an ability to impart his confidence to the rest of the 
Bolshevik central leadership. According to Trotski, Lenin had the 
advantage of obviously 'believing in that which he said' .17 
Even the Left Socialist-Revolutionaries, who wanted to see the treaty 
of Brest-Litovsk torn up, did not envisage Lenin's permanent removal 
from the chairmanship of Sovnarkom. Karl Radek, a Bolshevik 
opponent of the treaty, was approached by the Left Socialist-
Revolutionary Pavel Proshyan at a meeting of the All-Russian Central 
Executive Committee of the Congress of Soviets with the question: 
'Wouldn't it be simpler to arrest Lenin for a day, declare war on the 
Germans and then wholeheartedly elect comrade Lenin again as 
Sovnarkom chairman?' 18 The matter was not just personal (although a 
recognition of Lenin's exceptional qualities as a leader was involved). 
The Left Communists and Left Socialist-Revolutionaries also judged 
that any split with Lenin would cause a destructive narrowing of the 
political base of the October Revolution. Their revulsion against the 
treaty did not disappear. The Left Communists continued to battle for 
its abandonment in the lower party committees. The Urals Regional 
Committee and the Moscow Regional Committee, as well as the 
Taganrog Conference of Bolsheviks fleeing from Ukraine in the path of 
the German military occupation, were vehemently hostile to Brest-
Litovsk and all it stood for. 19 The problem for them was that they 
could not get many ordinary rank-and-file Bolshevik party members to 
join armed units willing to take on the Germans.20 Neither demobbed 
Russian peasants nor untrained Russian workers wanted to see 
military action. Moreover, Sverdlov and Lenin determined on an 
organisational decapitation of the Left Communists by means of the 
disbandment of the several regional committees. The Moscow 
Regional Committee was their first and most important victim.21 
 Merciless Retreat 
7 
At the same time Lenin no more wanted to lose the Left Communists 
than they him. Having won the Brest-Litovsk debate at the Seventh 
Party Congress, he hoped to keep them working for the party. The 
Central Committee met on 31 March, and he and his supporters 
decided to make overtures to their 'opponents', or at least to the more 
'businesslike' figures among them.22 Lenin saw that the Bolsheviks 
were too few to be able to dispense with a faction's assistance; but the 
words of the decision reflect also his condescension to the Left 
Communists as being given to light-headed abstractions in their 
thinking. It was urgent only to have the more practical of them back in 
his administration. 
He would not go down on his knees to invite them. Their opinions 
on foreign policy were matched, in his eyes, by an equally pernicious 
plan for domestic legislation. They demanded faster nationalisation in 
industry and commerce. They were centralisers to an even higher 
degree than Lenin. In agriculture they wanted a more rapid movement 
towards collective farming; and they argued that the Bolshevik party, 
having seized power from the Provisional Government in the name of 
the working class, should reject Lenin's call for 'state capitalism'. 
Nikolai Bukharin, Nikolai Osinski and V. M. Smirnov - the most 
prominent theorists of Left Communism - urged that the party should 
pursue the objective of 'proletarian' class interests. Bukharin had 
already produced a pamphlet entitled The Programme of the 
Communists (Bolsheviks). 23 Despite being schematic and full of 
jargon, the writings of this left-wing Bolshevik troika appealed to 
many, perhaps even most, long-standing party activists. Lenin 
consequently had reason to fear Bukharin's return to the fold. 
Nevertheless there were also grounds for welcoming them. The Left 
Communists, while preaching on the need for the maximum of 
initiative 'from below', put an extreme emphasis on central state 
control. They were still more utopian and incoherent than Lenin;24 but 
in practice, like him, they tended to support centralist force against 
locally-established collective endeavours whenever they had to make a 
choice. 
This meant that their alliance with the Left Socialist-Revolutionaries 
over the Brest-Litovsk treaty could not last. Lenin saw this as he 
tackled the shortages of food supplies in Russian cities in April and 
May 1918. A. D. Tsyurupa as People's Commissar for Food Supplies 
requested plenipotentiary powers to requisition grain throughout the 
country, and Lenin agreed with him. On 8 May the matter came before 
Sovnarkom. Tsyurupa's draft decree bluntly threatened sanctions 
 8 
Lenin: A Political Life 
against anyone not complying with the law.25 Here was a cause that 
bound the Left Communists and Lenin back together against the Left 
Socialist Revolutionaries. The requisitioning of grain by urban 
detachments appealed strongly to the Left Communists as being a 
long-overdue return to 'proletarian' priorities! 
Lenin's enthusiasm was as strong as theirs; he even criticised 
Tsyurupa's wording as being weak and ambiguous. At Sovnarkom he 
demanded the insertion of a clause declaring the need 'to wage and 
carry through a merciless and terroristic defence and war against the 
peasant bourgeoisie and any other bourgeoisie keeping grain surpluses 
to themselves'.26 Punishments should be specified. Lenin recommended 
a minimum of ten years' forced labour and permanent expulsion from 
the village commune in any case of hoarding.27 Sovnarkom was 
unconvinced. On 9 May a further discussion took place and Lenin's 
amendment was rejected.28 Yet there was essential agreement by 13 
May that the People's Commissariat of Food Supplies should receive 
plenipotentiary authority to requisition grain.29 No central govern-
mental organ below Sovnarkom could overrule its decisions, and all 
local institutions were to render obedience. Lenin kept up the pressure. 
On 26 May he drafted further theses on the gathering of grain from the 
villages, even proposing to turn Trotski's People's Commissariat of 
Military Affairs into a 'Military and Food Supply Commissariat' 
which would devote nine tenths of its efforts to acquiring grain. If 
kulaks were to be punished for hoarding, so Trotski should order the 
decimation of any army unit found to have committed acts of plunder 
in the villages.30 Lenin's blood was up. Neither he nor his party would 
brook opposition to the basic re-orientation of policy. Their will to 
resolve the problem of grain supplies by means of centrally-organised 
violence was unflinching. 
The requisitioning campaign predictably infuriated the Left 
Socialist-Revolutionaries. But Bolsheviks of all persuasions hardly 
cared. If matters had come to a total break with the Left Socialist-
Revolutionaries, so be it! Lenin and his opponents in his own party 
had found common cause once more, and were relieved that they could 
work together again. On 11 June there came the decree establishing 
committees of the village poor (or, in the Russian acronym, kombedy). 
This was an attempt to split off the poorest peasants from the rest of 
the peasantry, especially from the so-called kulaks. The committees of 
the village poor were enjoined to inform the armed urban detachments 
where the grain was being hoarded, and were promised a share of the 
grainstocks seized. 31 
 Merciless Retreat 
9 
Not only Lenin but also his colleagues were recklessly narrowing the 
political base of their regime. Their alienation of the Left Socialist-
Revolutionary Party was accompanied by persecution of the 
Mensheviks and Socialist Revolutionaries. Bolsheviks were made 
anxious by the rise in working-class antipathy to themselves. Elections 
to soviets which put Mensheviks back in a majority were ruled invalid 
by Sovnarkom. But this did not eradicate the difficulty. The discontent 
was simply transferred to other arenas: anti-Bolshevik sentiment found 
expression in the growing popularity of the movement for an Assembly 
of Plenipotentiaries among Petrograd workers. Strikes broke out in 
northern Russia, and an improvised demonstration at Kolpino on 9 
May was fired upon by troops loyal to the Bolsheviks. The incident 
caused revulsion in Petrograd. The Putilov Works, which in 1917 had 
prominently supported the Bolshevik political advance, came out in 
sympathy with the Kolpino demonstrators. 32 But Lenin was in no 
mood to yield. Repression was swift whenever and wherever the writ of 
Sovnarkom was infringed. Blaming the troubles on the Mensheviks 
and the Socialist Revolutionaries, he looked forward to confronting 
them on 9 May when he was scheduled to deliver a report to the 
Central Executive Committee of the Congress of Soviets. At the last 
moment his appearance had to be cancelled. In the previous twenty-
four hours the Germans had pushed over the demarcation line 
established by the treaty of Brest-Litovsk. This might have signalled 
the treaty's total breakdown. Lenin was pre-occupied by the diplomatic 
and military crisis rather than rendered cowardly by the prospect of 
justifying his policies to the Central Executive Committee.33 Sverdlov 
took his place, and was catcalled for his pains. Five days later, on 14 
May, Lenin returned to the political fray and castigated the 
Mensheviks and Socialist Revolutionaries with ferocity. If they had 
expected to witness his humiliation, they were sadly disappointed. 34 
They also suffered repression at his hand. Worried lest they should 
use the Central Executive Committee as an instrument to mobilise 
support among discontented workers, he took the awesome step of 
expelling them from its membership on 14 June. 35 It was an event quite 
as historic as the dispersal of the Constituent Assembly in January 
1918. The Mensheviks and Socialist Revolutionaries continued to 
participate fitfully in public affairs over the ensuing three years, but 
always on Bolshevik terms. Arrests were to become frequent. Yet 
another stride had been taken towards the establishment of a one-party 
state. That Lenin and the rest of the Bolshevik Central Committee 
should have rushed so fast to impose such a dictatorship is evidence of 
 10 
Lenin: A Political Life 
their extraordinary confidence that, despite the terrific reverses 
endured by them at home and abroad since October 1917, history 
was on their side. 
It testifies, too, to a reckless willingness to take a gamble. Never had 
the military threat to Sovnarkom been greater. Lenin was extremely 
dull about anticipating the scale and timing of outbreaks of civil war. 36 
A particularly acute threat was poised over Sovnarkom by the 15,000 
Czech prisoners-of-war who, by agreement with Trotski, were being 
shipped along the Transsibcrian railway to Vladivostok. They were 
armed, and their purpose was to join the Allies on the Western front in 
the Great War. But Trotski and Sovnarkom were in two minds. They 
were tempted by by the possibility of recruiting the Czechs into the Red 
Army. The Latvian riflemen were being used to great advantage. Why 
not also usc the Czechoslovak Legion?37 At any rate Trotski was 
disinclined to treat these troops with much circumspection. He made 
no effort to smooth relations between the Legion and the Bolshevik-led 
soviets of the towns they passed through along the railway line. A 
conflict broke out in Chclyabinsk in the Urals region on 17 May. 
Instead of rushing to quieten things down, Trotski blustered and 
threatened the Legion. By 23 May his subordinate S.l. Aralov was 
ordering the disarming of all Czech troops in every town. 38 This was 
attempted even though the Legion at the time was the strongest force in 
the territory ruled by the soviets. Omsk fell to the enraged Czechs on 25 
May. On the same day Trotski telegrammcd from Moscow: 'All soviets 
arc hereby ordered immediately to disarm all Czech trains.' In his brisk 
style, he added that any member of the Legion bearing a rifle should be 
shot on the spot.39 
Where Trotski lurched, Lenin followed. Despite the Legion's revolt, 
it was on 26 May that Lenin proposed to Sovnarkom that Trotski's 
Red Army should be diverted to the grain-requisitioning campaign.40 
Trotski did not accept the scheme; but neither he nor Lenin retrieved 
themselves sufficiently to make the necessary overtures to the Legion. 
Some Czech troops had not yet reached even the Urals and were in 
south eastern Russia. Detachments of them were resting at Penza, only 
560 kilometres from Moscow. Lenin received an appeal for assistance 
from the Penza Bolshevik leader Minkin. The replies that went back 
from Moscow ordered the town and district soviets of Penza province 
to dispatch military aid to the provincial capita1.41 Lenin and Trotski 
were digging a hole for themselves, but refused to stop digging. After 
skirmishings in Penza, the Czechs occupied the town on 29 May. Even 
then Trotski was undaunted. On 4 June he announced a new slogan: 
 Merciless Retreat 
1 1 
'Up with Civil War!' Four days later the Czech legion took Samara. 
The entire Volga region and most towns on the Transsiberian railway 
in the Urals and Siberia were under their controt.42 
EMERGENCY IN MOSCOW 
The Czechoslovaks had had no intention of overthrowing Sovnarkom; 
but on arrival in Samara they were besought by the Socialist 
Revolutionaries, whose leaders had fled there after the dissolution of 
the Constituent Assembly, to fight on behalf of Komuch. This was the 
abbreviated title of the Committee of Members of the Constituent 
Assembly. Komuch asserted that it had the most legitimate claim to 
rule the country, and called for the overthrow of the Bolshevik party 
dictatorship. The Legion, exasperated by what they regarded as 
Sovnarkom's treachery, accepted the invitation. A half-day's train 
journey separated them from the Russian capital, the Kremlin and 
Lenin. By mid-June the danger could no longer be underestimated. 
Unless a Red Army could quickly and effectively be moved into action, 
the Bolshevik leadership would be caught in Moscow and overthrown. 
Nonetheless it still appeared to the Central Committee under Lenin 
that political retreat and reconciliation would endanger the regime to a 
greater extent than pursuit of the existing policies. Anti-socialist 
groupings were rounded up by the Cheka; and a conspiracy called the 
Union of the Motherland and Freedom was crushed. Lenin also 
refused to be intimidated by the resumption of assassinations as a tactic 
by the Socialist Revolutionaries. V. Volodarski was killed by them on 
21 June 1918. Moscow became unsafe for the Bolshevik Central 
Committee even though the Czechoslovaks had not yet moved from 
the river Volga. 
Such doubts as Lenin entertained he did not express. Martov was the 
world's greatest Lenin-watcher, and claimed to be able to detect a 
muffled uncertainty in his speeches in mid-1918. Supposedly Lenin was 
questioning whether the Brest-Litovsk treaty had really been worth 
signing. His arguments against Bukharin and the Left Communists, 
according to Martov, were essentially a means of persuading himself as 
much as the Left Communists: 'The nub of the matter here is not a 
struggle of citizen Lenin with some group standing to his left, but 
rather an inner struggle of the two souls which constitute contempor-
ary Bolshevism. '43 
 12 
Lenin: A Political Life 
Martov, for once in his life, underestimated Lenin's determination. 
Possibly the Bolshevik leader may have been wondering whether the 
benefits of the treaty were as great as he had originally supposed; but 
not for a moment did he deny that the signature of a separate peace 
with Germany and Austria-Hungary was a better option than any 
conceivable alternative. Thus he remained firmly committed to his 
foreign policy. This would necessarily involve an assault on the Left 
Socialist-Revolutionaries. But when? And who would initiate it? Lenin 
waited on events, and did not have to wait long. On 24 June the Central 
Committee of the Party of Left Socialist-Revolutionaries met secretly 
to approve the assassination of German diplomats in Moscow. They 
planned to provoke a reaction by the German armed forces which 
would shatter the Brest-Litovsk treaty. The Left Socialist-Revolu-
tionary leaders hoped that this would lead to a rapprochement of their 
party and the Bolsheviks in the cause of revolutionary war.44 The idea 
was as audacious as it was ill-considered, overlooking the utter 
unpreparedness of the Red Army to resist German armed forces. 
Intimations of the Left Socialist-Revolutionary conspiracy reached the 
ears of Felix Dzierzynski, Bolshevik chairman of the Cheka, on 28 
June. But Dzierzynski seemingly lacked knowledge of the details. 
Certainly he took no preventive action, and even continued to work 
alongside Left Socialist-Revolutionaries in the Cheka.45 Yet the two 
parties eyed each other like boxers edging around the ring before 
throwing the first punch; their dissent about Brest-Litovsk and about 
grain seizures was so fundamental that a violent contest was virtually 
inevitable. When the Fifth All-Russian Congress of Soviets opened on 
4 July, they each arranged their own guards in the area inside and 
around the Kremlin. The tension between them was intense.46 
The Congress quickly became an irrelevance. The items on the 
agenda were important: agrarian policy, the Brest-Litovsk treaty, the 
Constitution. Yet victory for the Bolsheviks was already guaranteed by 
their majority over the Left Socialist-Revolutionaries of voting places. 
In any case, the debates were put abruptly into the shade on 6 July by 
the assassination of German ambassador Count von Mirbach. Cheka 
functionary and Left Socialist-Revolutionary Yakov Blyumkin had 
entered the embassy premises accompanied by an associate. He had an 
official Cheka pass and was received respectfully when he asked for an 
interview with Mirbach. On Mirbach's appearance in the ante-room, 
Blyumkin had pulled out a gun and shot him.47 
Blyumkin ran off from the melee and evaded capture; but reports of 
the assassination came to Dzierzynski and Lenin. Lenin had no 
 Merciless Retreat 
13 
hesitation. Despite being taken by surprise, he immediately resolved 
upon the complete suppression of the Party of Left Socialist-
Revolutionaries. Blyumkin's murderous action gave the Bolsheviks a 
chance to behave as if reacting to an outrage rather than merely 
persecuting fellow socialists. His cynicism was remarkable. At this 
moment he had no sure information that the Left Socialist-
Revolutionary Central Committee had instigated Blyumkin's action. 
Leonid Krasin recalled him smiling and saying: 'In short, we'll levy an 
internal loan from among our SR comrades ... and thus we'll both be 
drawing attention to our innocence and be acquiring some capital.'48 
His meaning was about to become clear. Lenin had it in mind to arrest 
and execute a member of the Left Socialist-Revolutionary Central 
Committee. Blyumkin was too lowly a figure to offer to the German 
government in expiation of Mirbach's death. Legal procedures and 
basic personal fairness were not considerations for Sovnarkom's 
chairman.49 He intended nothing less than judicial murder. Disposi-
tions were made for the detention of Left Socialist-Revolutionary 
delegates to the Congress of Soviets in the Bolshoi Theatre. 
Dzierzynski, whose inaction had facilitated the assassination, was 
dispatched to Left Socialist-Revolutionary headquarters to make 
further arrests. Lenin was realistically contemptuous about the 
potential strength of the armed resistance to his forces. He opined 
that, for all the inefficiencies of the Bolsheviks, the Left Socialist-
Revolutionaries were in a sorrier condition and were chattering instead 
of organising. 50 
Lenin acted speedily for two reasons. First, he wanted to catch the 
Left Socialist-Revolutionaries unawares. Second and even more 
urgently, he had to reassure the German authorities that his own 
party had had no part in the assassination. The sole advantage to 
Berlin in retaining the Bolsheviks in power was their adherence to 
Brest-Litovsk. Without this, Lenin would be useless to the Germans. It 
was therefore decided that a delegation of Yakov Sverdlov, Georgi 
Chicherin and Lenin should present their condolences at the embassy 
within hours of Mirbach's death. Sverdlov was head of state and 
Chicherin had been appointed People's Commissar for External 
Affairs. Their rank, it was hoped, would have a positive effect upon 
the contents of the official German report on the shocking event about 
to be cabled. 51 
Lenin carried out the mission with distaste. In March, when the 
Brest-Litovsk treaty was being signed, he had firmly refused to attend 
the ceremony: he wanted to limit his association with what he described 
 14 
Lenin: A Political Life 
as 'the obscene peace'. Still less did he desire to be seen, when the treaty 
retained its disrepute, to be going cap in hand to the Germans. But 
unlike Trotski and Dzierzynski, he could not plead that military duties 
precluded him from joining Sverdlov and Chicherin. Off they set in 
grim mood. Trotski was later to record the scene: 'In the sense of 
internal experiences this was probably one of the heaviest moments of 
his life.'52 On arrival at the embassy, Lenin carried out the necessary 
formalities. Even so, a German official noted that the Soviet leader's 
comportment was very stiff, being marked by a 'cold politeness'.53 
Lenin was glad to leave the embassy a few minutes later. But his feeling 
of relief was quickly dissipated by news of further bungling. 
Dzierzynski again was the culprit. At the Left Socialist-Revolutionary 
headquarters he tried to arrest all those in the building. The Left 
Socialist-Revolutionaries perceived what fate lay in store for them. 
Until then they had neither revolted nor intended to break permanently 
with the Bolsheviks; their strategy of assassination displayed an 
infantile standard of calculation, but they had genuinely meant no 
harm to the Bolshevik party. To their horror they saw that the 
Bolsheviks aimed at their suppression. Dzierzynski and his companions 
were seized as hostages. With nothing left to lose, the Left Socialist-
Revolutionaries resolved to take control of key points in the capital. 
An unplanned revolt against Bolshevik power began. S4 
Dzierzynski's ineptitude was such that rumours were to circulate that 
he secretly wanted the Left Socialist-Revolutionary terrorist campaign 
to succeed. 55 He had been a Left Communist, and he still detested the 
Brest-Litovsk treaty. Thus he purportedly turned a blind eye to 
Blyumkin's conspiracy. This is no more cogent than the story that 
Trotski deliberately provoked the Czechoslovak Legion to revolt. 
Dzierzynski affirmed in his own defence that Blyumkin had forged his 
signature on the Cheka pass-card used to gain access to the German 
embassy; and that the information about a possible attempt on the 
embassy was too vague to enable the Bolshevik Cheka leaders to 
prevent Mirbach's death.56 Be that as it may, Dzierzynski surely did 
not act as if he was trying to aid the Left Socialist-Revolutionaries once 
the assassination had taken place. His armed detachment went to arrest 
and not to reinforce the Left Socialist-Revolutionaries. No nods or 
winks were made about Brest-Litovsk at the Left Socialist-Revolu-
tionary headquarters. The episode was so botched that Dzierzynski, the 
feared head of the Cheka, found himself under arrest. 
Lenin resumed practical control. Returning to the Kremlin, he 
 Merciless Retreat 
15 
summoned General I. I. Vacietis of the Latvian Riflemen. Vacietis's 
support was crucial in view of the military weakness of the Bolsheviks 
in Moscow; and the deployment of the Red Army to the Volga region 
cramped the possibilities of reinforcement from elsewhere. To Vacietis 
he posed the question: 'Comrade, will we last out till morning?' It is 
possible that this was a subtle attempt to strengthen the resolution of 
the Riflemen.57 Yet he may also have begun to understand that the 
balance of forces, ill-trained as most of them were on both sides, might 
suddenly change to the disadvantage of the Bolsheviks. In the Great 
War he had scoffed at theories stressing the technical sophistication 
required in modern warfare.58 He was learning his mistake by harsh 
experience, and drew the conclusion repeatedly stressed by the less 
nai"ve Lev Trotski: namely that even a small number of well-trained, 
well-led troops could prove more than a match for countless amateur 
soldiers such as the Red Guards and assorted people's militias.59 Yet 
Trotski can hardly have been high in Lenin's esteem at the time. 
Trotski and Dzierzynski had between them nearly given away the 
October Revolution; and Lenin's tendency to rely on his own 
judgement must have been reinforced by the midsummer crisis. The 
preservation of 'Soviet power' depended entirely upon the loyalty and 
efficiency of a Latvian officer who was neither a Bolshevik nor a 
proven military officer. 
Fortunately for Lenin, Vacietis completed his task splendidly. By the 
next day, 7 July, he had driven the rebels from their strongholds so that 
Lenin could announce to the rest of the country: 'The uprising of Left 
SRs in Moscow has been liquidated.'60 Dzierzynski was liberated and 
further arrests of Left Socialist-Revolutionaries took place. 
V. A. Aleksandrovich, one of their Central Committee members, was 
executed by Dzierzynski in person on 8 July: the expiatory sacrifice 
demanded by Realpolitik.61 An uprising of Left Socialist-Revolution-
aries had also been started in Yaroslavl, a town to Moscow's north 
east, on 6 July, but was suppressed a fortnight later. The former 
coalition partners of the Bolsheviks went down to defeat; almost 
without noticing it, Lenin and the core of Bolshevik Central Committee 
members had passed over the threshold from a two-party revolutionary 
dictatorship into an outright dictatorship by one party. That this was 
accomplished with so little comment shows that the movement was 
congenial for them. They would rather fight alone and against the odds 
than rally a coalition by compromising their political and economic 
policies. 
 16 
Lenin: A Political Life 
MANOEUVRE, RETREAT, WAIT 
Lenin knew that the treaty of Brest-Litovsk depended entirely on the 
German government's intentions, and that these in turn were shaped 
by success or failure for German forces on the Western front. Belgium 
and northern France, not the Pripet marshes, held the answer to the 
enigma of the October Revolution. If Ludendorff rolled through into 
Paris, it would not be long before he moved smoothly into Moscow 
and Petrograd. 
Lenin did not lie supine in the meantime. But he wanted to leave 
behind what he ridiculed as the politics of the 'revolutionary phrase' .62 
As he recognised, the October Revolution had survived because the 
extreme militarists in Germany had yet not opted to cross the limits set 
by the Brest-Litovsk treaty.63 The Bolsheviks deferred to Bertin; their 
forces were pathetically incompetent to resist. Moscow's policy was 
merely to kow-tow to Kaiser Wilhelm. The sections of the treaty 
forbidding hostile propaganda could in practice be ignored, and the 
Soviet state would continue to hope for European socialist revolution. 
'We know,' Lenin had reassured the Fourth Congress of Soviets in 
March 1918, 'that Liebknecht will be victorious one way or another; 
this is inevitable in the development of the workers' movement.'64 But 
how this would happen was unpredictable. At a session of the All-
Russian Central Executive Committee on 29 April he was brutally 
frank: 'Yes, the peace we have arrived at is unstable in the highest 
degree; the breathing space obtained by us can be broken off any day 
both from the West and from the East.'65 But what did Lenin say to 
those who claimed that, since Brest-Litovsk, he had no independent 
policy?66 Not a lot in public: he was constrained to avoid Biving offence 
to the German government. But to the Central Committee he was more 
forthcoming. In mid-May he drafted theses urging that the priority of 
Soviet diplomacy should be 'to manoeuvre, to retreat, to wait'.67 
Playing one capitalist power against another was, Lenin urged, the sole 
option available in the circumstances. Imperialism could not yet be 
confronted directly.68 
Exactly how the Germans might be manipulated against the Allies 
was not examined by him;69 but he suggested that America's interest in 
obtaining raw materials from Russia might encourage president 
Woodrow Wilson to deter the inroads of the Japanese.70 Nor did he 
describe how much further the Soviet state could 'retreat' before 
disappearing. This was sensible. Brest-Litovsk remained too divisive to 
permit him to state what bits of territory might be abandoned; and, for 
 Merciless Retreat 
17 
the same reason, Lenin did not want to define the temporal limits of 
'waiting'. There was only one small point, tucked into a subsidiary 
clause, which was controversial. This was Lenin's proposal that the 
Soviet state should not absolutely repudiate 'military agreements with 
one of the imperialist coalitions against another'.71 He would let the 
Red Army fight on the side of either the Central Powers or the Allies if 
the situation demanded. Quite a manoeuvrer he was willing to become. 
Fresh from compelling his party to accede to a separate peace treaty, he 
now contemplated joint campaigns with 'imperialism'! 
What had produced this shift in a man who in 1917 had imperiously 
castigated the imperialist states is a matter of guesswork. That he had 
intended a permanent 'German orientation' in international relations is 
unlikely. His faith in the inevitability of continental revolution was 
genuine. Immediately he pursued a policy of appeasement. The 
Germans exploited Brest-Litovsk to concentrate forces in the West 
and even to transfer troops from the Russian front. Ludendorff bet 
that, once the Allies had been defeated, the Soviet government would 
be an easy victim. Lenin's political survival depended on Allied military 
success in the West at least until such time as the long-expected 
revolution should break out in Berlin.72 Never had German might 
seemed so invincible. Ludendorff's Western offensive was initiated on 
21 March 1918, and continued through spring. Nor were the Germans 
inactive in the East. On 7 March they signed a treaty with the Finnish 
government, threatening the interests of the Soviet republic.73 In April 
they overthrew the Rada, which ruled Ukraine, and installed a client, 
Pavlo Skoropadsky as 'Hetman'.74 In the same month they marched 
into Crimea in contravention of the Brest-Litovsk treaty.75 The Red 
Army was not yet formed. Every political party in Russia regarded the 
Bolsheviks as traitors. Food supplies were dangerously low. Working-
class and peasant discontent was rising. Lenin, the vociferous advocate 
of a separate peace with Germany, insisted on all diplomatic efforts 
complying with Berlin's demands. 
Not even Lenin wished to give public display of such submissiveness. 
Patriotic emotion could not be offended. As his party's patriarch, he 
did not ignore the unease felt even by his sympathisers. Grigori 
Sokolnikov, who had opposed the Left Communists, jibbed at the 
appeasement demanded. Six out of fifteen Central Committee members 
had gathered on 10 May to discuss Lenin's 'Theses On The Current 
Political Situation'.76 Sokolnikov argued that Germany's political coup 
in Kiev introduced new factors into diplomacy. Allegedly the action 
showed that an alliance had been formed between the Russian 
 18 
Lenin: A Political Life 
bourgeoisie and German imperialism. Sokolnikov had belonged to the 
Soviet delegation which had signed the treaty of Brest-Litovsk. Now he 
claimed that it was not worth the paper it was printed on. It appears to 
have staggered Sokolnikov, who until then had been Lenin's supporter, 
that the Germans had chosen and been able to rule Ukraine through 
local stooges. 
Sokolnikov however, was undeterred. War had supposedly become 
inevitable, and he urged a 'military agreement with the Anglo-French 
coalition with the object of military cooperation on certain 
conditions'.77 The vote went four to one in favour of Lenin's policy 
of continued appeasement of Germany. Sokolnikov had no supporter. 
Stalin pointedly abstained; he had been shaken by the German 
occupation of Kharkov, and began to question his own earlier 
advocacy of a separate peace with Germany.78 Sokolnikov had 
touched a sore spot. Lenin's high-risk strategy did not go unperceived 
as such. A fuller debate was necessary. Two major party leaders, 
Trotski and Zinoviev, had not been present. Lenin was especially keen 
to secure backing from Trotski, who had been on the left side in the 
Brest-Litovsk controversy. On 13 May the Central Committee met 
once more. By then a report was available from the Sovnarkom 
plenipotentiary in Berlin, Adolf Joffe, who gave the reassurance that 
Germany did not intend to disavow the treaty.79 Trotski and Zinoviev 
backed Lenin. Trotski was judged by Allied representatives in Moscow 
as a genuine promoter of an Allied foreign-policy orientation.80 His 
support for Lenin disproved this. Probably he pretended otherwise in 
public so as to keep the Soviet government's options open. At any rate 
the result of the Central Committee's decision of 13 May was to 
publicise the stronger turn than ever to the German orientation. 
Contacts with Allied diplomats waned. The frostiness over the British 
landings in Arkhangelsk became downright icy. 
It is true that Trotski as late as 24 May confided to British attache 
Bruce Lockhart that Sovnarkom did not seek the departure of the 
British forces from Murmansk.81 What shattered the possibility of this 
vestigial manoeuvring between the Germans and the British was the 
Czech Legion's revolt on 25 May 1918. Unequivocal appeasement of 
Germany became unavoidable. Lenin and the Bolsheviks were 
recognised in Berlin as godless and anti-monarchical. But Bolshevism 
was allowed to stay in power because it represented the sole Russian 
party which would adhere to the Brest-Litovsk treaty; and, unless the 
Red Army could reassure Berlin about its capacity to resist insurrection 
on Russian soil, the Bolshevik party would have been cast down by 
 Merciless Retreat 
19 
Ludendorff. The situation's urgency was demonstrated by Lenin's 
willingness to remove Red units from the demarcation line separating 
them from the German-occupied zone even though there was no 
guarantee that the Germans would not take military advantage. The 
Czechoslovak Legion had to be suppressed at all costs.82 
Extreme care was exercised in relation to Germany. On 10 June, 
Lenin rebuked the Bolsheviks in Kuban for mounting an attack on 
German troops in Taganrog, and similar instructions were issued two 
days later to Red Army and Bolshevik party personnel on the Southern 
front: no military engagement with the Germans was permissible.83 
Then came the assassination of Count Mirbach on 6 July. Rapid proof 
that Sovnarkom was uninvolved had to be offered. On 7 July, S. P. 
Natsarenus in Petrozavodsk was ordered to destroy the railway linking 
Petrograd and Murmansk after the British landings in the north in late 
June. Anyone collaborating with 'the Anglo-French imperialists' 
should be shot. 84 Lenin not only wanted to exhibit enthusiasm for 
Brest-Litovsk; he also increasingly wished to enlist the Germans in 
defence of Soviet-held territory against further landings by the Allies. 
The dispatch of a British expedition to Arkhangelsk was imminent. 
Lenin, who had refused to rule out the possibility of a 'military 
agreement' with the Germans in mid-May, got Chicherin to indicate to 
the new German ambassador, K. Helfferich, that Sovnarkom would 
not object to a German-Finnish action in Karelia. The conversation 
between Chicherin and Helfferich occurred on 1 August. By then the 
German offensive on the Western front was collapsing: a massive 
victory for the French had occurred at Villers-Cotteret on 18 July. 
Ludendorff sank into despair. This information was as yet unavailable 
to Lenin. The Western front was too far away. Yet Lenin anyway 
considered he had little choice. 'Soviet power' was so helpless that, as 
the Czechoslovaks had shown, even a moderately efficient small corps 
could threaten it severely. Consequently Lenin was even willing on 13 
August to risk inviting the Germans, through Chicherin, to bomb 
Arkhangelsk on Sovnarkom's behalf.85 
In a memorandum to V. V. Vorovski, Lenin asserted that 'we would 
be idiots not to make use' of the confluence of Soviet and German 
governmental interests.86 It took until 17 August for Pravda to 
announce that the German military menace to Sovnarkom itself had 
drastically diminished. The British break-through at Amiens on the 
Western front made this unmistakably clear. The Germans and 
Russians had initialled a supplementary treaty to the Brest-Litovsk 
arrangements on 10 August, and this was formally signed on 27 
 20 
Lenin: A Political Life 
August. The German terms remained severe, including a huge 
indemnity to be paid to Berlin. Russia obtained in return only a 
German promise to refrain from giving assistance to her enemies.87 But 
the supplementary treaty was already a dead letter. Germany had failed 
in her ultimate intensive effort to crush the British and French in the 
West. A new era in the Soviet republic's relations with the governments 
and peoples of the rest of the world was heralded. The two treaties with 
the Germans had not really brought about a 'breathing-space' for the 
development of socialism at home. Chaos, immiseration and civil war 
made any such development impossible. Lenin had misled himself. But 
Brest-Litovsk had at least ensured the sheer survival of the Bolsheviks 
in power. It was an achievement of Lenin's gamble in international 
relations. 
THE WRITING OF A CONSTITUTION 
Lenin scoffed at constitutionalism in politics. Before the October 
Revolution he had repeatedly scorned fixed laws, demarcations, 
customs. In November 1917 he declared: 'The living creativity of the 
masses is the basic factor in our new public order'; and he added: 
'Socialism is not created by commands from above.'1111 And yet clarity 
about the state's institutional principles was recognised as being 
overdue. The Third Congress of Soviets in January 1918 had also called 
for the drafting of a Constitution; but nothing followed quickly. The 
Brest-Litovsk dispute pre-occupied the minds of both the Bolsheviks 
and the Left SRs. Not until 30 March did the Bolshevik Central 
Committee approve a proposal for the All-Russian Central Executive 
Committee of the Congress of Soviets to set up a drafting 
commission.89 Sverdlov chaired the first discussions on 5 April, with 
representatives in attendance from the Bolsheviks, Left Socialist-
Revolutionaries and SR-Maximalists as well as from particular 
People's Commissariats. Sverdlov was commission chairman, and 
Stalin was included as the Bolshevik official expert on the question of 
the nationalities.90 Notable by his absence was Lenin. Not only did he 
refrain from joining the commission, but he also made no comment on 
constitutional matters in ensuing months. It was a sign of the low 
immediate priority he assigned to the task. 
The federal basis of the forthcoming Constitution had been 
established, on Lenin's recommendation, at the Third Congress of 
 Merciless Retreat 
21 
Soviets in January 1918.91 On this he insisted. Having previously been 
a vehement anti-federalist, he had come to sense that the non-Russian 
regions of the old Russian Empire would be difficult to re-incorporate 
in a multinational state unless administrative units based on the 
national principle were introduced.92 He left it to Stalin to give a 
response to Pravda's enquiry about federalism as the commission 
began work. Stalin firstly emphasised that the details of the federal 
structure could not be formulated until the various non-Russian 
regions were to join the Russian Federation.93 Sovnarkom at present 
ruled only Russia- and not all Russia at that. He also claimed that the 
existing federal states abroad, the USA and Switzerland, were more 
centralist than federal in reality and that their administrative units were 
founded more on territorial convenience than national aspirations. The 
Russian federation, he maintained, would be different.94 
Thus Stalin did not forbear to stress that federation was not designed 
to be a permanent phenomenon. He asserted that it was to be regarded 
as merely a transitional stage towards 'an equally voluntary and 
fraternal union of the labouring masses of all the nations and races of 
Russia'. Stalin ultimately wanted a fully unitary state.95 This was not 
all. Talking of the potential members of the 'Russian Federal Republic' 
he mentioned not only Siberia, Turkestan, Crimea and Ukraine but 
even Finland and Poland as well.96 The contrast with Lenin was 
impressive. Lenin, no less than Stalin, accepted federalism only under 
strong duress. But he ceased publicly to announce that he would 
overturn it at the earliest available opportunity. Nor did Lenin raise the 
possibility about the re-incorporation of Poland and Finland just 
months after Sovnarkom had vouchsafed their independence.97 In 
Poland's case this had made no practical difference while German 
armies remained in occupation. Even so, Stalin was tossing aside the 
argument that Russians would be politically unwelcome in those parts 
of the Russian Empire unless the Bolshevik party went out of its way to 
disclaim territorial acquisitiveness. The plan to win support for 
socialism elsewhere in Europe by pointing to Sovnarkom's anti-
imperialist commitment was also being undermined.98 Yet Lenin was 
so unexercised by the constitutional question that he did nothing until 
Sverdlov's commission reported back to the Central Committee.99 
Stalin was in any case closer to Lenin's viewpoint than were other 
commission members. Bolsheviks such as M. N. Pokrovski andY. M. 
Steklov angrily opposed the insertion of 'the national principle' into 
the Constitution, and their hostility was shared by Left Socialist-
Revolutionary M.A. Reisner. 100 Sverdlov had to intervene on Stalin's 
 22 
Lenin: A Political Life 
side to insist that the government had already laid down 'national self-
determination' as an unalterable basis of policy. Stalin returned to the 
commission on 12 April to defend himself. This time the accusation 
was slightly different. Previously he had been criticised for making 
concessions to nationalism; now his proposal was said to offer insincere 
promises. The Left Socialist-Revolutionary went further: 'Comrade 
Stalin has got so accustomed to such a situation that he has perfectly 
assimilated even the jargon of imperialism. "They demand and we 
give" And of course, according to Stalin, we don't bother to give if they 
don't make any demands of us.' 101 
Rivalry continued about the draft Constitution to be taken as the 
basis for further deliberation. The three main proposals came from 
Sverdlov, Stalin and Reisner. Stalin won more support than 
Sverdlov, 102 and there followed a contest between Stalin and Reisner. 
The two of them argued their cases on 19 April. Reisner teased him for 
advocating exactly the 'anarchic' ideas espoused by Lenin in The State 
and Revolution. This booklet, which had recently been published but 
had been written in mid-1917, envisaged a revolutionary order with 
much greater scope for popular initiative than Lenin was willing to 
tolerate by 1918. Reisner's sarcasm got under Stalin's skin. All he could 
say in reply was: 'Mention has been made here of comrade Lenin. I 
would permit myself to remark that Lenin, so far as I know - and I 
know very well -, has said that this project is worthless.' 103 Some 
Bolshevik members remained unhappy with his performance. The need 
for any reference to national issues rankled so much that Pokrovski, a 
Bolshevik, preferred Reisner's draft. But Stalin got his way .104 The 
majority of the participants, some more enthusiastically than others, 
gave approval to his draft. Almost certainly they judged that any 
failure to support him would not be the end of the matter. Lenin and 
Stalin in 1917 had taken pains to get the slogan of national self-
determination accepted in the Bolshevik party, and were convinced 
that its deployment would help the Bolsheviks in the Civil War. Neither 
was a man lightly to be trifled with. 
Stalin subsequently left the commission to Sverdlov for the 
Constitution's elaboration. Lenin began to take an interest from a 
distance. His main ambition for the Constitution was for it to rouse 
workers and peasants to support the Bolsheviks. Unfortunately the 
draft was flat and unrhetorical. Sverdlov was no stylist, and the various 
amendments made since the departure of Stalin, who was a crude but 
effective writer, had not led to improvements. Lenin seized control, 
persuading his colleagues on the Central Committee to include an 
 Merciless Retreat 
23 
entirely new preamble. Even then he refused to write it. Instead he 
substituted a text already accepted at the Third Congress of Soviets, 
namely 'The Declaration of Rights of the Labouring and Exploited 
People' submitted by Lenin to the Constituent Assembly in January 
1918.105 
Sverdlov, understandably miffed, behaved like a disciplined 
Bolshevik and induced the commission to comply on 17 June. 106 The 
Bolshevik Central Committee, looking at the result nine days later, was 
unimpressed. Lenin even threatened to remove the Constitution from 
the agenda of the forthcoming Congress of Soviets. 107 Sverdlov, who 
had many other duties to fulfil at the same time, felt unappreciated by 
his party leader. 108 The commission redoubled its labours; detailed 
consideration of the definition of Soviet state institutions took place at 
a commission meeting held on the same day. 109 Its final draft was 
perused by the Central Committee, in the presence of Lenin and 
Trotski, on 3 July. 110 The stitching together of the commission's 
clauses and the 'The Declaration of Rights of the Labouring and 
Exploited People' had been done in a rough and ready fashion. 
Terminological inconsistencies were plentiful. But no one worried any 
longer. A last effort at polishing the style, but not the contents, was 
entrusted to Yuri Steklov; and it was Steklov, a leading ex-Menshevik 
writer and editor, who was instructed to present the draft Constitution 
to the Fifth Congress of Soviets on 10 July 1918.' 11 By then the Left 
Socialist-Revolutionary revolt had been suppressed. Nevertheless the 
Bolshevik Central Committee did not introduce further amendments 
after being released from the need to conciliate the party's coalition 
partners. Nor did it fret over Steklov's lowly status as rapporteur on 
the Constitution. Lenin did not even bother to speak at the Congress of 
Soviets session. 112 
The Constitution of the Russian Socialist Federal Soviet Republic 
came into effect on publication in Izvestiya. 113 The objective was 
defined as a 'free union of free nations as a federation of Soviet 
national republics'. Yet direct reference to the federal structure 
occurred only in the Constitution's title and the preamble, and 
essentially the clauses described not a federal but a unitary state. 
Already there was more flim-flam than substance in the Bolshevik 
party's commitment to creating a federation. Nothing in this was 
surprising to those few citizens who had read the articles of Lenin and 
Stalin carefully. But the Bolshevik party leadership cynically hoped to 
attract the support of non-Russian peoples by showing off federalism 
as a slogan. 
 24 
Lenin: A Political Life 
The dominant theme was class struggle. Article nine ran as follows: 
'The basic task of the Constitution of the Russian Socialist Federal 
Soviet Republic, as adapted to the current transitional period, consists 
in the establishment of the dictatorship of the urban and rural 
proletariat and poorest peasantry in the form of the mighty All-
Russian Soviet power with the aims of the complete suppression of the 
bourgeoisie, the elimination of the exploitation of man by man and the 
introduction of socialism, under which there will be neither a division 
into classes nor state power.' 114 Here was yet another sign that Lenin 
approached the commission's draft without his customary attentive-
ness. Lenin had argued at length in his recently-published State and 
Revolution that socialism would be an entirely distinct phase of history 
between capitalism and communism. Marx, he claimed, had argued 
exactly this. 115 It was Lenin who made this inference for the first time, 
and it is by no means proven that he had correctly understood the 
standpoint of Marx; but it quickly became a tenet of Bolshevism. Yet 
Lenin did not intend to agitate himself and his comrades over a 
question of Marxism which since 1917 had been dear to him. Possibly 
Sverdlov, like most party members, had neither the time nor the 
inclination at such a moment to indulge in theoretical speculation. 
Monolithism of ideology did not yet exist. 
The Constitution itself unambiguously supported the interests of the 
'labouring people' against those of the employers. Universal suffrage 
was derided; and the principle was proclaimed: 'He that does not work, 
neither shall he eat.' 116 The disenfranchisement of the middle and 
upper classes was phrased as follows: 'In the general interest of the 
working class the RSFSR deprives individuals or particular groups of 
any privileges which may be used by them to the detriment of the 
socialist revolution.' 117 This was clarified in the definition of those who 
were allowed to vote. Among those excluded were private employers, 
private investors, private businessmen, monks, priests, former police-
men, criminals and registered imbeciles. 118 The same section implicitly 
cleared the ground for the Bolsheviks to outlaw any political parties, 
organisations or newspapers. 
The rights of those retaining the franchise were ostensibly 
comprehensive. Freedoms of thought, organisation, religion and 
assembly were emphasised, and the Constitution promised to realise 
them by putting the necessary resources at the disposal of the 
'masses'} 19 But these masses were not to be treated equally. The 
clauses on the franchise gave a disproportionate number of places in 
central and local representative institutions to the towns. Thus workers 
 Merciless Retreat 
25 
and other urban employees were favoured in voting capacity at the 
expense of peasants. 120 But the distinction was more formal than real. 
The Constitution was not only propagandistic; it was also vague. For 
example, the demarcation between the Congress of Soviets and its All-
Russian Central Executive Committee remained obscure; and, 
although Sovnarkom was endowed only with authority to issue 
decrees, no explanation was given as to how they would differ from 
legislation passed by the All-Russian Central Executive Committee.121 
As a legal document, the Constitution was dangerously skimpy. No 
one could have been more deeply aware of this than the man who had 
graduated with a first-class honours degree in law as an external 
student at St Petersburg University in 1891. Vladimir Lenin would only 
bother with constitutional trifles when his current political purposes 
were threatened. As things turned out, this did not occur until the 
'Georgian Affair' in 1922, when Lenin disputed Stalin's policy towards 
the non-Russian nations of the Soviet multinational state.122 
TO KAZAN! 
The national question had been debated hard in the commission on the 
Constitution, but was scarcely mentioned in the finally-published 
version. In similar fashion it was important but secret in the discussions 
on security in midsummer 1918. Trotski, Dzierzynski and Lenin 
confronted a near-disastrous military situation. They perceived the 
vital necessity to retain Latvian sympathies so long as the size and 
competence of the Workers' and Peasants' Red Army remained small. 
The Bolshevik leaders had also seen the uses of the prisoners-of-war 
taken by Russian armies in 1914-1917, especially those from the lands 
of the Hapsburg monarchy (and the Constitution itself had been 
formulated so as to grant citizenship to all foreigners working in Russia 
or fighting in the Red Army). 123 Hungarians, Czechs, Slovaks, 
Ruthenes and even Germans and Poles were looked upon as potential 
enlisters. 124 The problems of recruitment are readily comprehensible. 
The decree of 22 January 1918 establishing the Red Army was expected 
to result in the enlistment of hundreds of thousands of Russians. But 
few Russians were willing to fight. By late March, when Trotski was 
People's Commissar of Military Affairs, only around 10,000 Red 
troops were under arms. 125 Peasants wanted to stay with their recently-
acquired land, and had heard from demobilised soldiers about the 
awful conditions on the Eastern front. Workers supplied slightly 
 26 
Lenin: A Political Life 
greater enthusiasm. Moscow and Petrograd gave most volunteers; but 
there were difficulties elsewhere, even in major industrial centres such 
as Ekaterinburg, in convincing the working class that the Civil War 
affected their interests and required their participation. 126 
Trotski's efforts were intensified when the Czechoslovak Legion, on 
entering into Samara, put itself at the disposal of the Komuch 
government of Socialist Revolutionaries aiming to overthrow the 
Bolsheviks in Moscow. His initial military expert was General M.D. 
Bonch-Bruevich (who, despite his anti-socialist convictions, was 
brother to Lenin's personal assistant Vladimir Bonch-Bruevich). They 
agreed that officers from the Imperial armed forces would be essential 
to the technical functioning of the Red Army. Trotski also insisted, in 
line with practice in the existing Red units, on the exercise of rigorous 
political control. Hostages were taken from serving officers' families, to 
be shot in cases of desertion or betrayal. A system was also introduced 
whereby serving officers were accompanied by commissars whose task 
was to ensure the loyalty of commanders and spread communist ideas 
among the troops. 127 
Down to the Volga sped the hastily-mobilised contingents of the Red 
Army. The commander-in-chief was I. I. Vacietis, replacing M.A. 
Muraviev (who was a Left Socialist Revolutionary and had tried to 
defect to the side of Komuch). Kazan fell to Komuch's forces on 7 
August. So swift was the attack that they moved on to Sviyazhsk. If 
successful, they would have cut off contingents of the Red Army 
moving upon Kazan. Trotski showed courage and tenacity; his train 
lay within range of enemy fire until the battle was won. Sviyazhsk was 
held and the Reds marched upon Kazan. Lenin stayed in Moscow in 
August. The central administration of the Red war effort was still 
chaotic, and he sent telegrams to the government's military and food-
supplies officials to the north around Arkhangelsk and to the south 
around Astrakhan. 128 But the crucial region was the Volga. The 
following note was dispatched to Trotski from Lenin: 'I'm sure that the 
suppression of the Czechs and White Guards, as well as the 
bloodsucking kulaks who support them, will be a model of 
mercilessness.' 129 Such 'encouragement' gave way to irritated demands 
by 10 September: 'I'm astonished and worried by the delay of the 
operation against Kazan, especially if my information is correct that 
you have a complete opportunity to annihilate the enemy by artillery. 
In my view, there should be no sparing of the city or any further 
postponement since what is required is merciless destruction as soon as 
Kazan is definitely within an iron ring.' 130 
 Merciless Retreat 
27 
If Lenin harboured a suspicion that Trotski might wage war in too 
sensitive a spirit, he had misjudged him. On 29 August 1918 Trotski 
had held a field court martial of troops and their officers who had 
retreated against orders under fire. He re-introduced the Roman 
punishment of decimation, and refused to exempt a certain Panteleev, 
political commissar and Bolshevik party activist, from execution. This 
provoked outrage in the Bolshevik party. Not only did Trotski employ 
Imperial officers but he also handed over party members to the firing 
squad. The fear lest he might eventually set himself up as the Napoleon 
Bonaparte of the October Revolution struck roots. Trotski, whose 
associate A. P. Rozengolts headed the court martial, was unrepentant 
and sought Lenin's support on 23 October. In the opinion of the 
People's Commissar of Military Affairs, all deserters regardless of 
party affiliation should suffer the same fate. 131 
On 10 September 1918 the Red Army entered Kazan and drove out 
the Komuch forces. To the south a further operation was already under 
way. Its commander was Mikhail Tukhachevski. He was one of 
thousands of both junior commissioned and non-commissioned 
officers from the Imperial Army given rapid promotion by Trotski, 
and on 12 September he repaid this trust by taking the Volga town of 
Simbirsk. This was Lenin's birthplace. But the chairman of Sovnarkom 
was unsentimental about the fact. He was anyway out of touch with 
Trotski's whereabouts (and had to telegram 'to Kazan or Sviyazhsk'). 
After curtly 'welcoming the capture of Simbirsk', he adjured: 'In my 
opinion, maximum forces must be concentrated for the accelerated 
cleansing of Siberia. Don't spare any cash in the form of rewards. 
Telegraph whether Kazan's treasures, and how many of them, have 
been saved.' Lenin had approved a scheme to expropriate ecclesiastical 
and historic valuables; but, since such a step might have caused 
popular indignation, the telegram was marked 'highly secret'. 132 This 
was as well for other reasons. Lenin failed to understand the 
geographical limitations of the Red victory. Talk of reconquering 
Siberia was vastly premature. First the Komuch authorities had to be 
overthrown in Samara. Only on 7 October could this be accomplished, 
nearly a month later. The Socialist Revolutionaries decamped 
eastwards. Komuch was no more. 
Lenin was not the sole Bolshevik to exult, and Pravda editorials were 
understandably keen to emphasise the successes in battle. The 
Czechoslovak Legion was demoralised. The Volga peasantry had 
proved reluctant to enlist in Komuch's defence; and potential recruits 
were anyway fewer by far than in Moscow and Petrograd. Yet the 
 28 
Lenin: A Political Life 
central party leaders, both in the Kremlin and by the Volga, had little 
knowledge about other Russian forces being formed to attack the 
Reds. Admiral Kolchak and Generals Denikin and Yudenich were 
assembling armies in the peripheral regions of the old empire. The Civil 
War was at last about to explode in all fury. 
Admiral A. V. Kolchak was based in the Siberian city of Omsk, and 
was building advantageous links with the British government. In his 
turn he was able to attract the remnants of the Czechoslovak Legion. 
His confidence was growing. Undoubtedly he would have laughed to 
read Lenin's carefree command for an immediate cleansing of Siberia. 
General A. I. Denikin, after the death of Lavr Kornilov in action in 
April 1918, had taken over the armed units of anti-Bolshevism in 
southern Russia. Denikin was looking to the local Cossacks for joint 
military operations. As yet he had few contacts with either Kolchak or 
the Allies; but his threat to Sovnarkom would soon become as acute as 
Kolchak's. General N. N. Yudenich led the smallest of the so-called 
White armies. But he was organising on Estonian territory and 
menaced the security of Petrograd. From three sides of the compass 
there was a threat to the existence of the Bolshevik party and the Soviet 
government. Yet Lenin referred to none of them in his telegrams in 
1918. Having blundered by assuming that the arrest of Cossack leader 
M.P. Bogaevski in February would signal the Civil War's end, he 
believed Trotski's success at Kazan and Samara was definitive. He 
failed to anticipate that resistance to Sovnarkom could become much 
more serious if conducted by the counterrevolutionary elements of the 
Imperial officer corps. He had read Karl von Clausewitz the military 
theorist and drawn the stupidest conclusion that, in modern times, the 
waging of war would get steadily easier. He was about to learn the 
error of his ways. 
