 8 Against the Wall 
POLITICS AND CONTROL 
Official party rules are not the most accurate guide to the reality of 
party life. The quest for unity is honoured in the breach. Few political 
parties can afford to alienate existing or potential members by too 
severe an insistence on compliance with centrally-imposed decisions. 
Even the single party in a one-party state can encounter difficulty in 
eliminating factionalism from its affairs; indeed, as in Kenya in the 
1970s and Zimbabwe in the 1980s, the indulgence of factions can act as 
a safety-valve for the maintenance of the regime. But other one-party 
states, especially those whose rulers feel internationally isolated and 
grossly unpopular in their own society, dispense altogether with this 
mechanism. For Saddam Hussein in Iraq, nothing but utter obedience 
to his command sufficed from the start of his dictatorship. 
Such obedience is obtainable only through the application of terror 
to the party. The Bolsheviks declared adherence to the strictest 
centralism and discipline in successive versions of their rule-book; but 
factions, organised or semi-organised, continued to exist despite the 
resolution banning them at the Tenth Party Congress. The proclaimed 
goal of a party sculpted from a monolithic block was not achieved. 
Naturally this was not how Bolsheviks critical of Lenin saw matters. 
For them, his power had reached not far short of the dictatorial. Lenin 
saw things differently, to the point of outright exasperation. When 
Adolf Joffe had written to him in this vein, he responded on 17 March 
1921 with text and verse on the difficulties he perennially faced in 
getting his way: 'The old Central Committee (1919-1920) beat me 
down on one of the most gigantically important questions, as you 
know from the discussion [about the conflict between the Water-
workers Union and Tsektran in the early stage of the "trade union 
controversy"]. On questions of organisation and personnel there is 
verily no end to the occasions when I have been in the minority. You 
yourself saw examples of this many times when you were a Central 
Committee member. ' 1 Thus Lenin refuted the claim that he had 
established a dictatorship over the party; but his own words, with their 
condescending implication that Joffe was overwrought because of an 
excessive workload, was evidence of a confident dominance bordering 
219 
 220 
Lenin: A Political Life 
on arrogance. His was indisputably the most influential voice in the 
Politburo. And the Politburo ruled the country in the interstices of the 
Central Committee meetings. 
The other central public institutions were subordinate to the party 
apparatus. A Politburo member ran each of them. Lenin chaired 
Sovnarkom and the Council of Labour and Defence; Kamenev the 
Moscow City Soviet and the Moscow City Party Organisation; Trotski 
the People's Commissariat of Military Affairs; Stalin the People's 
Commissariat of Nationality Affairs and the Workers' and Peasants' 
Inspectorate; and Zinoviev the Executive Committee of the Communist 
International and the Petrograd City Party Organisation. Candidate 
members of the Politburo also had crucial posts. Bukharin edited 
Pravda; Kalin in was the chairman of the Central Executive Committee 
of the Congress of Soviets; and Molotov was the senior member of the 
Secretariat. The powers of these institutions interlocked with and 
overlapped each other. Each major issue had an impact on all the 
institutions. But just as the People's Commissar of Military Affairs had 
the right to poke his nose into economic strategy, so Lenin interfered in 
innumerable corners, large and small, of public life.2 As Sovnarkom 
chairman, he had even more natural reason than other Politburo 
members to get involved. The minutiae of governmental affairs were 
grist to his miiJ. While he was fit, he had no thought of changing his 
routine. Never having been good at delegating responsibility, he felt no 
impulse to change his habits while the Soviet state attempted to 
implement the contentious New Economic Policy. 
The one central institution which, in his estimation, needed an 
overhaul was that same central apparatus of the party. Like other 
Bolshevik leaders, he had heard and ignored critics like the Democratic 
Centralists who said- among other things- that the party ought to re-
organise its bodies in Moscow in pursuit of greater efficiency. So long 
as dominant and reliable figures such as Sverdlov and Stasova were in 
charge, Lenin had not cared a fig. He had agreed that systematisation 
was required in 1919 when Krestinski, Preobrazhenski and Serebrya-
kov took over; but, when illness affected them in tum, he made no 
effort to seek replacements. 
His attitude had begun to shift in 1921. On the quiet, he wanted the 
Orgburo and Secretariat to destroy the threat from the respective 
sympathisers of Shlyapnikov and Trotski. Moreover, the New 
Economic Policy required more flexible processes of deliberation than 
in the Civil War. The supervision of an emergent mixed economy 
demanded that the central party organs should effect a masive increase 
 Against the Wall 
221 
in their control of the party in the provinces. The situation necessitated 
a larger staff in the centre and a set of Departments within the 
Secretariat, and Molotov was given the job of bringing this about. 
Lenin treated him brusquely. Once he even wrote: 'This is a scandal, an 
incredible delay. I shall raise the question of the C[entral] C[ommittee] 
apparatus at the Politburo. Eh, eh! It mustn't go on like this? Even the 
new Registration and Distribution Department was unsatisfactorily 
organised.4 Molotov was blamed. Whether the charge was fair is open 
to doubt (even though everyone from Trotski to the most unsocialist 
historians have assumed sol). Let us look at the facts of Molotov's 
career. Later, despite his notoriety as an arch-Stalinist, he was 
universally recognised as an excellent office manager. Trotski, in a 
typical bit of double thinking, characterised him as a typically 
unimaginative but methodical bureaucrat.5 Lenin's letter was really 
an instance of the party's supreme leader driving a subordinate to 
higher levels of industriousness. Molotov had only to show a degree 
lower than total assiduity, and Lenin would pounce on him. He was a 
demanding boss. His personal assistants in Sovnarkom had witnessed 
this already. First with him had been Vladimir Bonch-Bruevich. Then 
came Nikolai Gorbunov. By 1921, his secretaries Lidiya Fotieva and 
Mariya Volodicheva were fulfilling such a function: he wore them all 
out by his exigent political style.6 
He had no complaints about Molotov's ability to tighten party 
discipline. A purge was announced in June 1921.7 Drunkenness, 
careerism, religious belief, idleness and corruption were the basic 
categories for expulsion. But there was also a stated goal of removing 
Bolsheviks who had failed to carry out party instructions: this was 
clearly aimed at activists who, despite the ban on factions at the Tenth 
Party Congress, campaigned overtly for their views. Not only Trotski's 
supporters but also the Democratic Centralists kept clear of any such 
potential accusation. But the Workers' Opposition were not so 
inhibited. Around a quarter of the entire membership of the Russian 
Communist Party was expelled by the end of the year.8 
How many lost their party cards through membership of the 
Workers' Opposition is not yet known. Shlyapnikov and his friends 
insisted that expulsions of this kind were many in places like Nizhni 
Novgorod, and they successfully demanded that a commission of 
enquiry should be established. The fact that three commissions were 
sent there before the purgers were given a formally clean bill of health 
suggests that the Workers' Opposition truly suffered as it claimed.9 Yet 
the mud did not stick to Lenin (in contrast to the way it caked him in 
 222 
Lenin: A Political Life 
relation to his economic retreat of 1921 ). After the Tenth Party 
Congress he avoided harassing any of his critics, from Shlyapnikov to 
Trotski, in public; and his comments on Preobrazhenski were known 
only to fellow central colleagues. He left the dirty business to the 
Orgburo and the Secretariat. Lenin acknowledged to Stalin that he was 
not quite au fait with the scale of the Orgburo's activity in re-assigning 
party officials to jobs across the country. 10 This did not demonstrate 
that Orgburo member Stalin was bamboozling Lenin. Nothing of the 
sort! Lenin and Stalin were allies. Molotov's difficulties in reforming 
the Secretariat had led to Stalin's being asked to help with the recently-
inaugurated Agitation-Propaganda Department. 11 It was not as if 
Lenin himself was uninvolved in assignments of personnel at the very 
highest level. The Politburo continued to have ultimate control. 12 
There is no sign that Lenin was unhappy about the policy on 
assignments pursued by Stalin and Molotov. Lenin, as his reprimand 
to Molotov about technical matters of organisation demonstrates, was 
not slow to complain whenever he was annoyed - and everyone knew 
he had the authority to get the results he desired. 13 
His distance from the implementation of intra-party discipline 
permitted him to take a paternal attitude to dissentient Bolsheviks. On 
5 August 1921 he wrote to G.l. Myasnikov, who inspired several 
activists who proceeded to form the small anti-Bolshevik socialist 
parties, such as Workers' Truth and Workers' Group, after the Tenth 
Party Congress. Another socialist who had influenced them was none 
other than Lenin's inveterate adversary Aleksandr Bogdanov. A 
favourite slogan among them was that the initials of the New 
Economic Policy, the NEP, stood for the New Exploitation of the 
Proletariat. 14 
Myasnikov wished 'freedom of the press for everyone from the 
monarchists to the anarchists inclusively', arguing that their news-
papers would expose the abuses of official power. 15 Lenin responded 
severely: 'Why insist on this mistake of yours, this clear mistake, on this 
non-party, anti-party slogan: "freedom of the press"?' 16 Like Joffe, 
Myasnikov was said to be suffering psychologically. His 'nerves' 
required settling down! 17 But Lenin was also comradely: 'We'll get 
together and we'll work amicably in the same party. The benefit will be 
immense, but it will come not immediately but very slowly.' 18 Most 
Bolsheviks, however critical they were of Lenin, assumed that in some 
recess of his mind he meant well. Lenin seemed to many as a one-man 
court of appeal when Bolsheviks felt that the party's principles were at 
stake. Myasnikov, however, was an exception: he refused to behave in 
 Against the Wall 
223 
the expected quasi-filial fashion and persisted in factional activity. On 
20 February 1922, the Politburo expelled him from the party.l9 
Shlyapnikov, while having no connection with the emergent political 
parties, became equally recalcitrant. The Orgburo sought to limit his 
impact by transferring him to food-supply jobs in the provinces. 
Workers' Opposition leader Shlyapnikov refused to accept any 
appointment outside the capital. On 14 October 1921 Lenin submitted 
a draft instruction to be issued by the Politburo, reaffirming the 
validity of the Orgburo's decision about Shlyapnikov.20 
Behind the scenes Lenin was therefore as firm as the rest of the 
Politburo in tightening the disciplinary screws. And yet, for the first 
time since the failed assassination attempt in August 1918, he was often 
absent when the decisions were taken. Insomnia and severe headaches 
plagued him.21 On 4 June 1921 the Politburo at Molotov's prompting 
required him to take a break from work until the following month.22 
He ignored this altogether. But on 8 July he relented: his condition left 
him far from well. He wrote to Molotov requesting permission to ease 
his working load for a month. With his doctor's agreement, he would 
come to his office only twice or three times a week - and then only for 
two to three hours - so as to be able to attend the Politburo and 
Sovnarkom.23 Yet his condition did not much improve, and the 
Politburo on 9 August insisted on his taking a more extensive rest. This 
time he was co-operative, writing bluntly to the Politburo a couple of 
days later: 'I can't work.'24 
In fact he still intervened frequently in Politburo and Sovnarkom 
business by letter,2s and on 13 September he resumed his normal 
workload duties. 26 Indomitable though he was, he found he could not 
fully carry out his duties. On 28 November, wishing to make an 
organisational re-arrangement for the duration of his incapacitation, 
he wrote to Aleksandr Tsyurupa proposing to introduce and regularise 
a system for running Sovnarkom in his own absence. Aleksei Rykov 
and Aleksandr Tsyurupa, his deputies in Sovnarkom, would divide 
areas of competence between them. In justifying his proposal, he oddly 
made scant reference to his illness. Instead he simply stated that a 
formal two-deputy system would facilitate tighter supervision of the 
New Economic Policy.27 Equally odd was his favouring of Tsyurupa 
after the trouble between them when the the tax in kind was first being 
discussed and implemented; but Tsyurupa had come to recognise that 
the New Economic Policy was a fact of political life and was probably 
flattered that Lenin thought highly of his technical competence. In any 
case, Lenin had made his overtures rather late. Before a definitive 
 224 
Lenin: A Political Life 
official decision could be taken, he had to apply for extended sickness 
leave on 6 December: 'Comrade Molotov, I'm leaving today. Despite 
my reduction of the portion of work and increase in the portions of rest 
over recent days, my insomnia has increased like the devil.'28 The 
Politburo gave permission for him to move out to the elegant country 
mansion commandeered by the party at the village of Gorki and turned 
into a sanatorium. 
Still he was a reluctant patient. Not only did he write articles as well 
as memos but also he made working trips to Moscow: he was 
determined to keep himself involved in the politics of the central party 
leadership. The Politburo, with or without him, was the country's basic 
governing organ. But Sovnarkom was a lesser body needing someone 
to look after it while he was away. The proposal for a formally-
demarcated system of deputies remained on his mind as a contingency 
plan as he prepared for the Eleventh Party Congress.29 
In the Politburo there was little enthusiasm for Lenin's suggestion. 
Below the Politburo, Sovnarkom was the most influential institution in 
the Soviet state. No doubt Lenin had thought he had squared all the 
available circles by including Tsyurupa, a doubter about the New 
Economic Policy, in his thinking. But he had reckoned without the 
calculations of most of his Politburo colleagues. If Lenin was not going 
to hold the Sovnarkom chairmanship actively, then his immediate 
colleagues - Kamenev, Stalin, Trotski and Zinoviev - needed time for 
discussion and compromise before agreeing as to who should become 
his temporary deputies.30 It deserves emphasis that they were not (as is 
often supposed in East and West) unreasonable in their reluctance to 
accede to Lenin's proposal. Why should he dominate them in his 
absence? Each Politburo member had confidence in his individual 
achievements and potentiality; none were shrinking violets when the 
distribution of power among them was an issue. Furthermore, the 
seriousness of Lenin's physical debility was as yet unperceived. Not 
only did Lenin play down his worries but also his doctors were 
generally encouraging. A hurried decision on the management of 
Sovnarkom was not to the Politburo's liking; in those winter months 
when party and government were hard pressed by questions of 
economics, internal security and foreign policy had their attention. 
A further factor was the wariness of each central Bolshevik leader 
about his colleagues after the disputes among them in 1920-1921. The 
'trade union discussion' and the Tomski affair were in their minds, and 
the Tenth Party Conference had left them edgy about the situation in 
the party as a whole. Lenin's proposal, mild and merely technical 
 Against the Wall 
225 
though it seemed, could easily have re-opened controversy. Lenin the 
anti-factionalist, moreover, was a factionalist himself when his interests 
were in danger. Trotski and Bukharin knew this from recent direct 
experience. Lenin's motives could not always be assumed to be of the 
purest type. The party's patriarch was admired by his close associates, 
but not to the point of uncritical devotion. 
It is possible that Lenin continued to grind his factional axe even in 
the winter of 1921-1922. At New Year he no longer had much to fear 
from Shlyapnikov, who had long since left Moscow as demanded by 
the Politburo.31 But the suspicions about Trotski persisted. Lenin took 
trips to Moscow which allowed him to participate in intra-party 
discussions. Anastas Mikoyan, admittedly not the most reliable 
memoirist, purportedly was summoned to the Kremlin from Nizhni 
Novgorod for a meeting in Stalin's flat. They talked first about the 
threat from the Workers' Opposition; but both agreed that Trotski was 
more menacing. According to Mikoyan, Stalin told him that Lenin had 
empowered him to prevent Trotski's provincial supporters from being 
elected as delegates to the next Party Congress. Mikoyan was asked to 
travel to Siberia to meet M. M. Lashevich and pass on the scheme in 
the name of Stalin and Lenin.32 Stalin asked Mikoyan to tell only 
Lashevich about this, and to pretend that he was travelling to Siberia 
on family business. Stalin and Mikoyan had just completed their 
conversation when the door handle turned and in walked Lenin in his 
familiar cap and black overcoat. Lenin jokily remarked: 'Are you 
discussing your Caucasian disagreements?'33 Stalin was a Georgian, 
Mikoyan an Armenian. Lenin supposedly said no more, save for 
asking Stalin whether he had passed on what had earlier been agreed 
between himself and Stalin; but this, in Mikoyan's account, was proof 
enough for him that the covert plan against Trotski enjoyed the 
collusion of Lenin. 34 
Perhaps the meeting was a fiction of Mikoyan's imagination. 
Perhaps it took place, but Stalin misled Mikoyan about Lenin's being 
involved in the conspiracy. Perhaps Mikoyan told the truth and had 
been told the truth by Stalin. Whatever may be the accuracy of the 
memoir, the supporters of the Platform of Ten may indeed have 
decided to restrict the support for Trotski at forthcoming party 
gatherings in Moscow; and, even if Lenin was not involved in such 
schemes, he would have been a beneficiary of them. The Central 
Committee knew that he urgently wished his and not Trotski's 
interpretation of the New Economic Policy to be accepted in the 
party. At Lenin's instigation, Trotski had been rebuffed when 
 226 
Lenin: A Political Life 
demanding greater emphasis on central state planning, and was 
predictably unwilling to grant automatic sanction to Lenin's proposal 
for a formal system of deputies in Sovnarkom. 
THE THIRD CONGRESS OF THE COMMUNIST 
INTERN A TJONAL 
Lenin's troubles with non-Bolsheviks were considerably fewer than 
with the party. To be sure, he was not universally approved. Far from 
it: memories of the Civil War died hard, and even many workers 
detested him. 35 And yet, despite his reluctance to speak often in favour 
of the New Economic Policy, he was identified as its main promoter, 
and this led to an increase in his popularity. He was credited with 
whatever easement in material conditions resulted from the reforms of 
1921.36 Just as the Decree on Land in October 1917 had become known 
as 'Lenin's Decree', so the abolition of War Communism was counted 
unto him for virtue. This growing reputation had its irony. The man 
who sent out Tukhachevski to suppress the Volga peasants was 
becoming beloved of the peasantry. Nor did anti-Bolshevik profes-
sional cadres employed by the Soviet state withhold admiration even 
though he was still capable of letting the Cheka loose upon individuals 
among them.37 Of all Politburo members, undoubtedly he was the most 
popular. 
His prestige was equally high among foreign communists; for the 
New Economic Policy had not caused a rift within the Communist 
International, only some misgivings. Kronstadt, too, was passed over 
in virtual silence. While Lenin attentively watched over his Russian 
Communist party in the changing conditions of 1921, he took his eye 
off his leading comrades in Germany, Italy, Britain and France. The 
March Action in Berlin had been attempted with barely any 
consultation with him, and he did not immediately become involved 
in the resultant discussions in the Executive Committee of the 
Communist International.38 But a debate could not indefinitely be 
postponed: a questionnaire was issued to fraternal communist parties 
about the prospects of revolution in the rest of Europe. 39 Quietly Lenin 
had decided what kind of answer he would accept. Clara Zetkin, a 
German opponent of the March Action before it occurred, wrote to 
Lenin complaining of the wild incompetence of Bela Kun.40 This was in 
April 1921. A response came forth from Kun and the German 
communist leader August Thalheimer in their 'Theses on the Tactics of 
 Against the Wall 
227 
the Komintern'.41 Karl Radek then entered the reckoning. The 
Executive Committee of the Communist International, led by Kun's 
patron Zinoviev, appointed Radek to draft its own theses on the topic 
for submission to the International's Third Congress in late June.42 
Radek's wording dwelt dutifully on the need for German communists 
to win the support of more workers than those who were already 
communist party members; but he avoided demanding a working-class 
majority: instead he called for 'the decisive strata' of the proletariat to 
be pro-communist before revolution should be attempted.43 
When Kun found this too weak, Radek re-phrased it as 'the socially-
decisive parts of the working class'.44 The significance of the textual 
difference is opaque; but the purpose was unmistakable: Radek and 
Kun agreed that the acquisition of support from a majority of German 
workers should not be a prerequisite for insurrection. Whereas in 
autumn 1917 Lenin would have had no objection to such thinking, in 
1921 he thought it to be 'the cretinity of the "leftists"'. Calling for a 
clearer formulation of the theses, he urged that there should be 'no 
opportunity for anyone to discover in them whatever he wants'.45 He 
feared lest Kun and Thalheimer, who had instigated the March Action, 
would repeat the shambles on other occasions. On a point of party 
discipline, Lenin abandoned his original wish to reverse Paul Levi's 
expulsion from the Communist Party of Germany; but he conceded 
privately that Levi's warnings against the Action had been proved right 
in the event.46 
Lenin, burdened by the Soviet domestic political agenda, took three 
months after the Tenth Party Congress before inserting himself into the 
affairs of European communism. Trotski was doing the same; he 
exclaimed to Radek that the March Action had been botched from the 
start. But Lenin and Trotski did not conspire with each other.47 
Mutual distrust harmed their relationship after their battles over the 
trade unions. Lenin all the same impressed his unflattering opinion of 
Kun upon Zinoviev, who was responsible for letting Kun loose in 
Berlin;48 and Zinoviev obediently drew Radek, Bukharin and others 
together in a working group to produce yet another draft version of the 
theses. At Lenin's insistence, they included a phrase about the need to 
get the support of 'the majority of the working class' before power 
should be seized. In return they demanded that discussion of the March 
Action should be avoided.49 Even so, the leaders of the Communist 
Party of Germany felt betrayed by this compromise, and wrote to 
Lenin defending their past actions. On 15 June they met and 
pressurised him. He responded with a heated rejection of their case. 
 228 
Lenin: A Political Life 
Next day they wrote to the Central Committee of the Russian 
Communist Party, still unapologetically describing the Action as a step 
forward for the communist movement. 50 Lenin stated that he was sorry 
for showing his anger at his meeting with them.51 But he made no 
retraction on matters of substance. On 17 June he resumed his attack at 
the Executive Committee of the Communist International; probably it 
was then that he denounced 'les betises de Bela Kun: not the most 
conciliatory comment.52 He declared, too, that Kun was not 'a real 
Marxist'.53 
By then Lenin, Trotski and Kamenev were working closely to thwart 
Zinoviev, Bukharin and their supporters in the Communist Interna-
tional. 54 Several days before the Congress opened in the Bolshoi 
Theatre on 22 June 1921 it was obvious that Kun and Thalheimer had 
lost the struggle, and that Zinoviev's remaining aim was to disguise his 
own incompetence and to pretend that he was near to the subsequently-
established position of Lenin. The scene of decisive strife had already 
occurred in the Executive Committee of the Communist International. 
The Congress followed the pre-ordained line. The Russian Communist 
Party's mastery of the international communist movement was 
consolidated. 
On 23 June the Congress convened for its debates in the Kremlin's 
Andreevski Hall. A slight change was made to the Politburo's planned 
agenda when it was decided to take Trotski's report on the 'World 
Economic Crisis and the New Tasks of the Communist International' 
as the first item.55 Doctrinal legitimacy was to be obtained before 
practical measures would be discussed. Lenin, at least on this matter, 
felt he could trust Trotski. His health was unsettling him, and he went 
off to Gorki late on 25 June. He did not return to the Congress until 
midday on 27 June. A few hours later he returned to Gorki in his 
chauffeured limousine.s6 At last on 28 June, at session eight, he spoke 
for the first time at the Congress. 57 While his ideas dominated the 
proceedings, his physical presence did not. There had been no Congress 
like it; not even at the Tenth Party Congress had he been absent so 
persistently. His contribution came in remarks on the factory 
occupations in northern Italian cities in 1920. Erroneously he claimed 
that no Italian communist had participated in them.58 This 
unwarranted disparagement passed without serious riposte; Lenin 
was tolerated more generously than he deserved even among admirers. 
His ambition was evident: he wished to prevent, by fair means or foul, 
the repetition of Kun's adventurism (or indeed of his own ultra-
optimistic revolutionary strategy in the Polish-Soviet war of summer 
 Against the Wall 
229 
1920 if he had thought about it). On 30 June Lenin turned up again to 
the debates, listening attentively to Radek's frequently-amended report 
on the 'Tactics of Komintem'.s9 He had assumed that the decisions of 
the Executive Committee would be obeyed; but passions ran high 
about the March Action and this was the point in the Congress where, 
unless care was taken, things might go awry. Lenin kept Radek under 
appropriate surveillance. 
The report and debate on tactics were crucial. As Lenin had 
anticipated, the German participants expressed their opposition to the 
Executive Committee's line; and Lenin felt it necessary to respond in 
the eleventh session on I July. He first admitted that the officially-
proposed theses on Com intern tactics were 'a compromise'. Then he 
nailed his own colours to the mast. To the Congress's surprise, he 
proceeded to justify the open letter written by Paul Levi calling for a 
political alliance of all the parties of German socialism in January 1921 
(even though Lenin still refrained from seeking Levi's re-instatement in 
the Communist Party of Germany). He also demanded the retention of 
the phrase about 'the majority of the working class' in the theses. Lenin 
told the Congress that the German communists should adopt the 
Russian Bolshevik strategy of 1917. Supposedly the October Revolu-
tion in Petrograd was attempted only after the party had secured 'the 
majority of soviets of workers' and peasants' deputies' on its side.60 
This was falsehood. The Bolsheviks acquired a neat majority even in 
the urban soviets only after the Petrograd seizure of power, and 
Socialist Revolutionaries of various types were favoured by most 
peasants.61 A myth was propagated in the pursuit of political 
acquiescence. 
Nevertheless Lenin did not want totally to humiliate Thalheimer, 
and was willing to refer paradoxically to the March Action as 'a big 
step forward'.62 In sessions thirteen and fourteen, on 2 July, the overtly 
comradely ambience among the leaders of the Russian Communist 
Party was destroyed. The culprit was Kun. In a speech of self-defence, 
he claimed to agree with Zinoviev and Lenin but not with Trotski; his 
ploy was to imply that Lenin and Trotski disagreed about the March 
Action. Zinoviev thereupon affected to believe that the original theses 
of Radek had not been substantially altered by the several 
amendments. This was too much much for Trotski, and he subjected 
Kun to ridicule. Kun, a resilient soul, requested to make a further 
contribution. But Zinoviev, despite being furious with Trotski, 
terminated the debate; the theses of Radek were passed quickly and 
unanimously by Congress.63 Lenin had missed the proceedings. He 
 230 
Lenin: A Political Life 
presumably calculated that, as long as his principal aims were not 
challenged, he should let the other Bolshevik leaders deal with the 
problems; his health, too, was bothering him. Nevertheless Trotski, 
noting his non-attendance, asked him for help in repelling the attacks 
on him.64 But Lenin declined their request. On 4 July the Congress 
accepted theses on 'The World Situation and the Tasks of the 
Communist International' in Lenin's absence.65 It is hard to reject 
the hypothesis that, while revolutionary prospects remained dim, he 
did not want to waste time with the Communist International. He put 
more effort into the Politburo and into discussions about a 
concessional agreement being negotiated with the British firm of 
Urquharts.66 
Lenin tacitly recognised this by opting to present a report on Russia 
rather than on Europe.67 This came in session seventeen on 5 July with 
the debate on 'The Tactics of the Russian Communist Party'. His 
arguments for the New Economic Policy as delivered to the Tenth 
Party Conference in May 1921 were replicated with confidence. 
Bolsheviks had heard it all before. For the delegates to the Congress 
of the Communist International it was the earliest available chance to 
listen to Lenin himself explaining the measures of reform. The 
Congress had already gone as the Politburo had expected, and 
Lenin's status as the leader of the October Revolution made it 
unlikely that his report would attract much criticism. Lenin spoke for 
one hour and ten minutes. Only a speaker from the Communist 
Workers' Party of Germany objected, announcing that 'the clear 
demarcation line dividing us from the Hilferdings is entirely erased; the 
whole internal link with contemporary class struggle is completely 
missing'.68 His comment was ignored: Lenin's theses were adopted by 
acclaim.69 But his was an organisation which had split from the official 
Communist Party of Germany. It had been invited to the Congress 
against Thalheimer's wishes and was disowned by the Communist 
International shortly afterwards. 
The Congress resumed its vital deliberations on the theses on 'The 
Tactics of the Komintern'. Lenin wrote emolliently to the commission 
working on the final draft, explaining his criticism ofKun. He regretted 
having given offence to the Hungarian communists, but stuck to his 
basic analysis: 'Therefore I hasten to communicate in writing: When I 
myself was an emigre (for more than 15 years), I several times took 
"too left" a position (as I now can see). In August 1917 I too was an 
emigre and made too "leftist" a proposal to the Central Committee 
which fortunately was utterly rejected.'70 He also met up with the 
 Against the Wall 
231 
German delegation and, while using tactful words, insisted that their 
party show complete obedience to the directives of the Congress of the 
Communist International.71 He spoke in similar fashion to a joint 
meeting of German, Polish, Czechoslovak, Hungarian and Italian 
delegations on 11 July. Lenin repeated that lessons had to be learned 
from Bolshevik history. He told his audience how the slogan of 
European civil war, which he had approved in emigration in 1915, had 
had to be shelved in order that the party might win popular support in 
1917;72 and this time his historical accuracy was unchallengeable. 
Acknowledgement of personal error was Lenin's most obvious 
characteristic. His frankness is yet another indication of his zeal to 
hold foreign communist parties to a cautious standpoint. If he had 
applied himself with such energy at the beginning of the Congress, this 
frantic activity might not have been necessary. 
But on the whole he could be pleased. The German leader Robert 
Koenen was entrusted with the report on 'Organisational Structure'. 73 
Lenin and his Bolshevik associates, having dominated the Congress, 
had an incentive to give the impression that the Communist 
International provided its member parties with equal rights. In reality 
the Politburo had ruled the Congress from beginning to end. The thrust 
for a less risky revolutionary strategy around the world had been 
imposed. The Indian delegate Roy repeated his criticism from the 
Second Congress; in particular, he exclaimed, with reason, that the 
Soviet rapprochement with the major capitalist powers damaged the 
campaign for revolution in the colonial countries. This struck a chord 
with the Congress. Roy successfully proposed an amendment to the 
theses on 'The World Situation and the Tasks of the Communist 
International' expressing hostility to the rising bourgeoisies of the 
colonies.74 The Turkish delegates were on his side, and informed the 
Congress about their political difficulties since the signature of a treaty 
between Soviet Russia and Turkey.75 Lenin could tolerate the 
complaint. Europe had worried the Politburo before the Congress, 
and the proceedings had passed satisfactorily. On 12 July, as the 
Congress drew to a close, he absented himself and left the final 
ceremonies to Zinoviev. 
THE ARTS, SCIENCES AND SCHOLARSHIP UNDER LENIN 
The changes in Bolshevik foreign policy, now ratified by the 
Communist International, preceded the agrarian reform discussed 
 232 
Lenin: A Political Life 
from February 1921 and embodied in law in April. Not everything 
about the party's orientation was altered by the New Economic Policy, 
and many groups in society waited to see whether their own treatment 
by the authorities would be modified. Among these was the artistic 
intelligentsia. By the end of the Civil War there were writers and 
painters who expected an end to strict state control. Measures to 
supervise the country's arts had begun with the Bolshevik seizure of 
power in Petrograd. The Decree on the Press on 28 October 1917 
severely restricted freedom of expression in general.76 Not only active 
politicians but also novelists and poets with strongly anti-Bolshevik 
opinions were put on guard that Sovnarkom would retaliate against 
strong criticism by barring their access to printing facilities. Dozens of 
newspapers were closed in 1917-1918.77 The Cheka's importance 
increased in artistic matters and authors who offended the regime lived 
in fear of arrest. It is true that the poet Nikolai Gumilev, who was shot 
in 1921 on a false charge of complicity in a 'White Guard' plot, was the 
only major writer to suffer this fate. But the milieu was generally 
intimidatory to those who disliked Bolshevism. The earning of a daily 
crust supervened over other interests in the Civil War, and the state 
took advantage of indirect modes of control. Lenin had given approval 
in November 1917 to the introduction of a state monopoly in the 
reprinting of the Russian classics.78 In 1919 a huge publishing house, 
Gosizdat, was established. The nationalisation of existing printing 
presses supplied Gosizdat with massive influence over which new 
books should appear. Analogous state institutions were set up for other 
areas of the arts. 
Lenin's pre-occupations were understandably with the Whites, the 
foreign interventionist forces, the party, food supplies to the cities, the 
Comintern. The arts impinged little on either his political activity or his 
intellectual concerns in the early years of 'Soviet power'. His initiatives 
were few, and even his involvement in deliberations on artistic matters 
was exceptional. On 17 July 1918 he had chaired Sovnarkom when fifty 
monuments to heroic rebels of the past were commissioned. First in the 
list came Spartacus, the instigator of the greatest slave revolt in 
antiquity; Marx and Engels were fifth and sixth. The Roman tribune 
Tiberius Gracchus and Brutus, Julius Caesar's slayer, came second and 
third.79 The choice of subjects can hardly have been Lenin's. He would 
surely have placed Marx and Engels more prominently, and his 
classical studies as a youth would surely have reminded him that 
neither Tiberi us Gracchus nor Brutus were liberators of the people. 
 Against the Wall 
233 
Lenin proceeded to give a speech at the unveiling of the monument 
to Marx and Engels on the first anniversary of the October 
Revolution.80 But subsequently his interventions in 'high culture' 
tailed off. In 1918-1919 they were virtually non-existent. In January 
1920 he wrote to Anatoli Lunacharski, People's Commissar of 
Enlightenment, requesting an academic group to be set up to compile 
a new modern Russian dictionary incorporating the linguistic 
developments between Aleksandr Pushkin and Maksim Gorki.81 In 
February he requested the People's Commissariat of Posts and 
Telegraphs to support the radio laboratory in Nizhni Novgorod; and 
in June he put his weight behind a project to create an observatory at 
Pulkovo. At the end of the year he talked to all and sundry about the 
need to for electric power throughout the economy.82 Fitfully and in 
vain he enquired about progress with the dictionary.83 In addition, he 
kept an eye on Zinoviev's project for a modern Russian atlas - and he 
pointed out the several mistakes in it.84 But his caustic scorn was 
reserved for sloppy proof-reading. A book on Russo-French relations 
between 1910 and 1914 was castigated for 'the shameless, truly Soviet 
slovenliness for which the punishment should be prison'.85 These wild 
words were not, in this instance, meant to be taken literally. The book's 
author remained free. Indeed there were occasions when Lenin 
protected leading figures from the arts. Beseeched by Gorki, he 
ordered the release of prose writer Ivan Volny from a Cheka jail in 
April 1919;86 and Gorki again bent Lenin's ear in 1921 to get medical 
and financial care for the dying Aleksandr Blok, one of the greatest 
Russian poets of the century.87 
Lunacharski, with Lenin's contented acquiescence, was empowered 
to instigate and co-ordinate artistic policy. The Politburo knew that 
most creative artists opposed Bolshevism mentally and that several, 
even if they were unwilling to join the White armies, wanted to leave 
the country. The right to emigrate was frequently withheld in case the 
individuals should propagate anti-Soviet ideas abroad.88 Yet maltreat-
ment of writers and artists at home could be equally damaging, and the 
Politburo made arrangements, on Lunacharski's proposal, for major 
poets to be supported materially at public expense. This did not 
constitute a long-term policy for attracting artists of high quality to the 
side of the regime. Lenin dimly perceived this. In private he conceded 
that nearly all existing writers (and he was always more sensitive to 
literary than to other artistic developments) hated the Bolsheviks: 'New 
writers must be created from the workers, from the peasants.'89 
 234 
Lenin: A Political Life 
This was a common party aspiration. Lunacharski and Bukharin 
gave speeches encouraging the working class to supply pieces for 
newspapers.90 Lenin followed their line. But within the consensus there 
were tensions which grew stronger at the end of the Civil War. Lenin's 
taste in literature had been formed in the nineteenth century; and he 
knew what he liked and expected others to agree. As a youngster he 
had warmed to the novelist Ivan Turgenev. He had grown to love the 
novels of Lev Tolstoi and the short stories of Anton Chekhov, and 
never stinted in his admiration for the revolutionary writer Nikolai 
Chernyshevski whose novel What Is To Be Done? had been used by 
Lenin as the title of his own 1902 pamphlet on party organisation. He 
never ceased quoting the poet and critic of tsarism, Nekrasov.91 Lenin 
was primarily a man of the word, and wrote nothing about music, 
painting, sculpture or dance in his long career. Not that his spirit was 
closed to the other arts. He had attended light operas in his emigre 
years. He also was mightily attracted to Beethoven.92 But it was words 
on the printed page that evoked the supreme enthusiasms of the 
Bolshevik leader. Not only did he profess a very reasonable preference 
for schools to receive scarce resources in preference to ballet troupes, 
but also he was not unduly worried that the Bolshoi Theatre might be 
closed for a while in 1922.93 He would not have been similarly apathetic 
about a proposal to shut down printing presses. 
Meanwhile Maksim Gorki, while attenuating his objections to the 
Lenin's revolutionary project, failed to produce works of artistic 
merit;94 and among other outstanding writers who sided with the 
Bolsheviks there were none who adhered to the 'natural realism' of 
Lenin's favourite classics.95 Vladimir Mayakovski was a case in point. 
Lenin declared: 'I don't belong to the admirers of his poetic talent, even 
though I entirely confess my lack of competence in this area.' 
Mayakovski's merit in his eyes lay only in satirising the endless 
meetings characteristic of governmental and party activity.96 Otherwise 
Lenin found him and the self-styled 'Futurists' uncongenial. He urged 
that the state's near-monopoly of printing presses should be used to 
prevent publication of Mayakovski's lengthy poem '150,000'; he also 
proposed to limit Futurist publications to no more than twice-yearly 
print-runs of 1,500.97 Similarly permission for Aleksandr Bogdanov, 
who continued to write on social and political theory, to publish and 
lecture was within the gift of the Politburo: Lenin kept his ex-Bolshevik 
adversary on a tight rein.98 
Censorship held no horrors for Lenin. His past experience of it had 
convinced him of its efficaciousness rather than of its undesirability. 
 Against the Wall 
235 
This was not said openly by him or any other Bolshevik leader. His 
main pronouncements had been made while Nikolai II was on the 
throne. They came in two articles: 'Lev Tolstoi as the Mirror of the 
Russian Revolution' and 'Party Organisation and Party Literature'. 
The article on Tolstoi was written in 1908. It was an interesting piece of 
journalism, dedicated to the novelist's widely-celebrated eightieth 
birthday and focussed on the political ramifications of his oeuvre. In 
Lenin's view, Tolstoi represented the 'contradictions' of contemporary 
peasant life. Thus the Russian peasantry was anarchistic, obscurantist 
and backward-looking while also reaching forward to new forms of 
society. Lenin claimed that Tolstoi inadvertently summarised this 
vision and failed to draw the necessary political conclusion: namely 
that only class struggle, and not pacifism or a sentimental ruralism, 
would transform the life of the people.99 This incisive, if controversial, 
thesis was not untypical of the approach to literature taken by most 
socialist writers in Russia. Aesthetic merit was recognised and admired; 
but the political message, whether expressed or merely implicit, was 
taken as all-important. Lenin was no better and no worse than nearly 
all his comrades in boiling down works of art to their contribution to 
politics. In government he behaved accordingly. 
Indeed, writing 'Party Organisation and Party Literature' in 1905, 
Lenin had called for party-mindedness to be embodied in works of art: 
'What does this principle of party literature consist of! Not only in the 
fact that, for the socialist proletariat, literary matters cannot be an 
instrument of pressure by individuals or particular groups and cannot 
be in general matters for individuals independent of the general 
proletarian cause. Down with non-party litterateurs! Down with 
supermen-litterateurs! Literary matters must become a part of the 
general proletarian cause, must become "a cog-wheel and screw" of a 
single, monolithic, great social-democratic mechanism brought into 
motion by the entire conscious vanguard of the entire working class.' 100 
Naturally we have to remember that Lenin wrote these words about 
a party which did not yet have power and, furthermore, a party which 
had exiguous finances and limited access to printing facilities. Lenin's 
purpose at the time was to advise how to organise the party's 
newspapers (and to commission and control literary contributions to 
them) while being under threat from the Romanov monarchy. 101 This 
was not a blueprint for literary policy in all times and under all 
conditions. Rather it was designed to secure the party's interests in 
competition with other parties and under harassment by the Ministry 
of the Interior. The boundary between what was pro-party and what 
 236 
Lenin: A Political Life 
was anti-party was definable by reference to the party programme. 
Writers who did not like the political control over the contents of 
publication were free to join another party. Lenin added: 'Freedom of 
speech and press must be complete.'102 He denied that workers would 
by a show of hands vote to decide 'questions of science, philosophy, 
aesthetics'. 103 A distinct autonomy seemed to be offered by Lenin to 
literature. Albeit in stilted style, he conceded: 'It is beyond dispute that 
in this matter there is an absolute necessity to guarantee a larger space 
for personal initiative, individual inclinations- a space for thought and 
fantasy, form and content. All this is indisputable; but all this only goes 
towards demonstrating that the literary section of the party affairs of 
the proletariat cannot be identified through a pre-fixed pattern with the 
other sections of the party affairs of the proletariat.' 104 
And yet, for all his apparent sensitivity to the needs of the artistic 
intelligentsia, Lenin repudiated any concept of freedom. Financial and 
political constraints bore down upon everyone, including writers: 'It is 
impossible to live in society and be free from society.' 105 This, in a 
narrowly philosophical sense, is a defensible proposition. Coming from 
Lenin, however, it was freighted with menace for freedom of the arts 
under socialism. It would prove easy for his supporters to argue that 
'Party Organisation and Party Literature' recommended that litter-
ateurs be forced to conform directly to the party's requirements under 
the dictatorship of the proletariat. 106 
The article had not been so specific; and, while he interfered in the 
lives and working conditions of writers after the October Revolution, 
he did not instal a comprehensive, detailed direction of literature. Nor 
did he produce a theoretical article to underpin his various measures. 
Despite acquiring a posthumous reputation as the founder of Soviet 
artistic policy, he was not at the centre of discussions when the 
Bolshevik central leadership at last confronted the problem that the 
party had not acquired a phalanx of party litterateurs. As the New 
Economic Policy got under away, most persons active in the arts did 
not welcome Bolshevism. Zinoviev presented the leadership's conclu-
sions to the Twelfth Party Conference in August 1922 (while Lenin was 
recuperating from a stroke).107 He emphasised that the New Economic 
Policy would not involve 'freedom of the press for the bourgeoisie', and 
attacked the 'counterrevolutionary ideas' still appearing in print. 108 But 
unconditional repression would not work to the party's benefit either. 
The resultant resolution conceded that Bolsheviks, since they did not 
have many litterateurs, would have to find tolerable allies among 
literary groups which at least did not oppose them. 109 Trotski in 1923 
 Against the Wall 
237 
went still further, stressing that literature needed a certain autonomy of 
expression if it was to produce works of beauty. This was not far from 
the principle enunciated by Lenin in 1905. 110 It was a great pity, for the 
fate of Soviet literature in the 1930s, that he was too ill to re-affirm 
such a commitment in 1922. His silence would eventually allow Stalin 
to pluck out all the most authoritarian aspects of Lenin's pre-
revolutionary writings and deploy them for the total subjugation of 
literature to the state. 111 
AWAY FROM GENOA 
Overlordship of the arts, sciences and scholarship was left by Lenin to 
trusted subordinates. Not so international relations. The foreign policy 
of Soviet Russia was held tightly in Lenin's grasp. He and Chicherin, 
People's Commissar for External Affairs, were in regular communica-
tion. Chicherin was bright, inquisitive and creative. But he was a 
former Menshevik; he was well-known for his comfortable gentry 
background. He had been invited to assume his post, when it was laid 
down by Trotski after the signature of the Brest-Litovsk treaty, as a 
sympathiser of the party who had diplomatic experience. Unlike other 
holders of important jobs in Soviet politics, consequently, he needed 
patronage in order to make his way. Chicherin needed Lenin whereas 
Lenin merely found Chicherin a useful expert. 
International relations were highly contentious among leading 
Bolsheviks; but Lenin and Chicherin agreed on most matters and 
priorities. And Chicherin, from his side, admired Lenin's intuitive 
understanding of the skills of diplomacy. Like a traditional foreign 
minister bargaining on behalf of a weak state, Lenin wanted to 
manoeuvre between various capitalist powers; he wanted to play them 
ofT against each other. He was bracingly free, especially after military 
defeat at the hands of the Poles, from excesses of revolutionary 
rhetoric. Lenin's objective was the securing of further economic and 
political agreements with the advanced industrial countries. The 
Anglo-Soviet treaty confined him and the Soviet government, but 
not the Communist International, in their propaganda offensive on 
colonialism; but he was unrestrained in his comments on the Treaty of 
Versailles, on the inequities of capitalism and on the inevitability of 
communism's triumph. He was adamant that the Soviet state's policies, 
customs and laws were not up for barter. If capitalist countries, 
 238 
Lenin: A Political Life 
individually or collectively, wanted to deal with the Bolsheviks on this 
basis, well and good. If not, the Bolsheviks could and should bide their 
time. He counted on nothing happening very quickly; but he would 
work with Chicherin towards that end. His New Economic Policy, at 
least as he initially perceived it, demanded the cementing of further ties 
with the advanced capitalist countries. 
Nevertheless he had no great hopes of the victorious Allied powers. 
French ministers could not ignore the huge losses sustained by French 
private investors when Lenin's government had unilaterally renounced 
Russian state debts. Even Lloyd George was treated with low 
expectancy. In London the coalition cabinet under his leadership 
sought a revision of international relations in Europe which would 
facilitate a more rapid economic reconstruction and would inhibit the 
re-emergence of political tensions. This would include an admittance of 
both the Soviet and German governments to all-European official 
discussions. On pragmatic grounds Lloyd George believed that French 
severity towards Germany since the treaty of Versailles ought to be 
moderated. Nor had he ever accepted Winston Churchill's arguments 
for an Allied crusade against Bolshevik Russia; on the contrary, he had 
maintained that the communist experiment would be terminated most 
effectively by the restoration of trade links which sooner or later would 
undermine Lenin's regime. 
Lloyd George, while succeeding temporarily in London, predictably 
had difficulties in Paris. Both the French prime minister Aristide 
Briand and, more particularly, his president Alexandre Millerand were 
mindful of the French assets recently expropriated by Sovnarkom. The 
willingness of British political and business interests to bargain with 
Lenin was not shared in France, and it took months of persuasion for 
Lloyd George in the Allied Supreme Council to secure assent to an 
international conference to seek a resolution of Europe's problems. His 
cause was not eased by the insistence of the Soviet People's 
Commissariat of External Affairs that, if ever Sovnarkom were to 
recognise debts contracted by Nicholas II and the Provisional 
Government, the Allies would have to accept Soviet counter-claims 
for damage inflicted as the result of British and French intervention in 
the Civil War. 112 But Lloyd George did not relent. For him, the Anglo-
Soviet trade agreement of March 1921 was but a springboard into the 
pool of a continental settlement grander even than the Versailles treaty. 
He urged that an international business consortium be formed, 
including the Germans, for promotion of economic recovery in 
eastern Europe and Russia (as well as for the promotion of recovery 
 Against the Wall 
239 
at home), and that a meeting should be held to discuss the terms 
whereunder this might be done. 113 
Chicherin and the People's Commissariat of External Affairs looked 
on Lloyd George rather favourably, and differences with Lenin began 
to gain in significance. The Politburo scarcely took cognisance of Lloyd 
George's intensive activity. Throughout his years in power Lenin had 
acted as if an orientation towards the German government might be 
more useful, if only in the short term, than the quest for a pan-
European settlement. From Brest-Litovsk in 1918 through to his 
occasional remarks in 1920,114 he had dropped hints about this. By 
1921 the arrangements with Germany for increased trade and for joint 
military training were already working well. Lenin's instinct led him 
increasingly to scorn the British initiative. Karl Radek, presumably 
with Lenin's knowledge, published an article in Pravda on 4 December 
1921 urging German politicians and businessmen to recognise their 
opportunities in Soviet Russia. 115 In reply to Chicherin, Lenin called 
for Lloyd George to be faced down. On 3 January 1922 he proposed 
that the Soviet authorities should reject the Allied terms as totally 
unacceptable. 116 
Lloyd George and Briand met next day in Cannes. They agreed that 
the Soviet government, if it wanted to receive Western economic 
assistance, would have to recognise state debts and establish a legal 
framework for private enterprise as well as suspend communist 
propaganda abroad. A conference would be held in Genoa and the 
Bolsheviks would be invited to attend. 117 Even this set of terms caused 
ructions in Paris. Briand was compelled to resign and his place as prime 
minister was taken by his critic Raymond Poincare. Lenin became even 
more pessimistic about the proposed international conference. 
Furthermore, he was warned by Krasin not to travel to Genoa. The 
dangers of assassination were judged excessive. London would have 
been a venue where surer precautions might be taken against Russian 
monarchists and Socialist Revolutionary terrorists. 118 But Lenin 
thought himself indispensable to the Revolution, and on 12 January 
wrote to the Politburo declaring that not only he but also Trotski and 
Zinoviev should be prohibited from travelling abroad at all. Not even 
London was safe. 119 The disappointment affected not only Lloyd 
George but also the Western public. Everyone wanted to see what 
Lenin looked like. Did he really have the appearance of the Devil7 
Were the rumours true that he wore a suit? Did he look Jewish? Did he 
behave respectfully or was he a brawling Russian worker? Appetites 
had been whetted by lurid reportage, and the prospect of the Soviet 
 240 
Lenin: A Political Life 
leader's appearing in the streets and on newsreels had been attractive. 
The welcome which awaited Chicherin in Genoa would have been 
dwarfed if Lenin had journeyed westwards. But Lenin was immovable. 
On 16 January he wrote again to the Politburo suggesting that the 
Italian government should be asked for assurances that, even without 
him, the Soviet delegates would not be attacked by fascists. He 
maintained, too, that Chicherin should reinforce the current negotia-
tions with the Germans in advance of the Genoa conference. 120 
The technical preparations continued to worry Lenin. He demanded 
that radio communications be made available, and a Soviet warship be 
moored off the Italian riviera. 121 He was even more concerned that 
Chicherin wished to deal positively with Lloyd George. Chicherin's 
latest papers were described by Lenin as evidence of illness: 122 this was 
Lenin's typical reaction to differences with colleagues. If they disagreed 
with him, he would initially try to assume the best of them: namely that 
some disease had temporarily affected their brains. And so, on 22 
January, he impressed on the Politburo by letter that the delegation 
should agree to recognise debts only if they were to be covered in their 
entirety by Soviet counter-claims in relation to Allied military 
intervention in 1918-1919. Chicherin should also be instructed, 
according to Lenin, to make a demonstrative defence of Germany as 
the victim of the Versailles treaty and to try to split off the USA 
diplomatically from Britain and France. 123 Lenin continued to rail 
against Chicherin's willingness to concede to Lloyd George. He should 
immediately be sent off to a sanatorium to recuperate! 124 Lenin's 
toughly anti-British and pro-German orientation was now fixed in his 
mind. He was sending Chicherin to Genoa (albeit not to a sanatorium) 
without expectation of a comprehensive settlement in Europe. 125 
For a while the impression was maintained that Lenin would head 
the delegation, with Chicherin as his deputy. But the Central 
Committee, no less than Lenin, did not want Lenin to leave Moscow 
- and in any case his health still gave grounds for worry. 126 Lenin 
continued to harass the People's Commissariat of External Affairs. 
Chicherin's own Deputy Commissar, Maksim Litvinov, argued in 
favour of acceptance of the Cannes terms before the Politburo on 3 
February. 127 Lenin was having none of it. He also introduced an 
unexpected irritation. Unlike Chicherin, he had low hopes of the 
Conference, and therefore could indulge his favourite foreign-policy 
ploy of trying to divide the capitalist powers. Lenin successfully 
recommended that the Soviet delegation should make its proposals in a 
'bourgeois-pacifist' spirit. 128 Chicherin objected. All his life, even when 
 Against the Wall 
241 
he had been a Menshevik, Chicherin had opposed pacifism. Now he 
resolutely opposed Lenin's attempt to play on what both of them 
regarded as pacifist illusions. 129 But Lenin insisted, reassuring 
Chicherin that the party leadership's commitment to communism 
and non-pacifism was undiminished. 130 On 16 February, Lenin 
repeated to Chicherin that the Soviet delegates should not panic. 
Sovnarkom had never acceded to the Cannes terms, but had 
nevertheless received an invitation. 131 If the French were to exert 
further pressure, then Lenin demanded that Chicherin should propose 
a formula drawn up by Krasin: 'All countries recognise their state 
debts and are obliged to compensate the damages and losses caused by 
the action of their governments.' 132 So-called petit-bourgeois and 
bourgeois-pacifist support should be sought. Divisions among 
capitalist powers should be encouraged; and under no circumstances, 
Lenin demanded, should Chicherin sign anything without consulta-
tions with Moscow. 133 
The Politburo was approached by Lenin, who was spending much 
time at the Gorki mansion, for plenipotentiary authority to write his 
own directives to Chicherin in Italy. 134 This bossy initiative was 
rejected, and Chicherin departed in peace to Berlin before going on to 
Genoa. He remained unconvinced that the Germans wanted to draw 
closer to Sovnarkom. 135 Nor was he sure that too obvious a 
reconciliation with Berlin would not harm the Soviet republic's 
relations with the victorious Versailles powers. Lenin's recklessness 
alarmed him. 
And yet the Genoa proceedings, which began on 10 April, tended to 
validate Lenin's inclination. The French reined in the British, and the 
British were increasingly themselves divided: Conservative ministers in 
London were restive with Lloyd George. Chicherin for his part was 
restricted by the Politburo's adhesion to the viewpoint of Lenin. He 
wriggled out of his chains to affirm his readiness to accept 'just' 
requests in respect of expropriated foreign assets. 136 Fellow delegate 
Jan Rudzutak informed Moscow about him. Lenin persuaded the 
Politburo that a telegram be sent instructing Chicherin to correct this 
derogation from official party policy. 137 Meanwhile Chicherin himself 
had been surprised by the German resolve to settle separately with the 
Bolsheviks. No serious relief from the severity of the Versailles treaty 
had been offered to Berlin by the British and French. A bargain with 
Moscow became more tempting. Based at their hotel in Santa 
Margherita near Rapallo, Chicherin and his fellow delegates 
consolidated the agreements of the previous year. The 'Russians' and 
 242 
Lenin: A Political Life 
the Germans renounced all claims against each other about war losses 
and damage as well as about nationalised property. Full diplomatic 
relations would be resumed. Commercial ties were to be based on the 
principle of most favoured nation. 138 The general consequence was a 
breach in the front of European capitalism. Germany was a loser 
power at Versailles but still a major power, and had decided to treat 
with the land of the October Revolution on equal terms. Lenin could 
have been forgiven for believing that his judgement had been justified. 
He entirely abandoned interest in the Genoa negotiations. The point 
was, Lenin urged, to base future international planning upon the 
Rapallo paradigm. The Central Committee agreed and, at its plenum 
on 16 April, firmly resolved to reject British and French pressure to 
sign no separate treaties. 139 
At the same session Lenin accused the Soviet delegation of having 
been too soft in negotiations. The Central Committee repudiated his 
case and ruled that Chicherin had comported himself correctly.140 But 
Lenin would not let the matter drop. He wrote fiercely to the Politburo 
about 'the unprecedented, disgraceful and dangerous [sic] vacillations 
of Chicherin and Litvinov.' The Politburo agreed, but - on Stalin's 
proposal -
refused Lenin's request that Chicherin be officially 
disowned. 141 Lenin was undeterred. He also urged that the Soviet 
representatives should immediately break off discussions at the Genoa 
Conference. 142 Again he was turned down: the Politburo did not wish 
to annoy the British and French unnecessarily. On 9 May 1922 he 
chided Chicherin for 'flirting' with Rome rather than cajoling Italy to 
follow the example of Germany.' 43 But there the matter rested, and 
Lenin calmed down and started to enjoy his achievements of the past 
months. Enforced convalescence had not prevented him from getting 
his way over the main questions in foreign policy. He was not 
disappointed with the Genoa Conference; no, he was thrilled that 
Genoa had given the opportunity for Rapallo. He looked forward to 
future Rapallos. 
SHOW TRIALS AND REPRESSION 
There were other topics that kept him agitated. He had declared to the 
Ninth Congress of Soviets, in the last week of 1921, that the terror had 
been crucial to victory in the Civil War. 144 The Cheka had been the 
sword of the October Revolution; its murderous activities has been 
purposefully arbitrary. Entire social groups had been pre-emptively 
 Against the Wall 
243 
attacked through the system of the arrest and execution of hostages. 
Jails had been packed with victims. A system of concentration camps 
had been established, and the Cheka had been the most feared organ of 
state power. From 1921, however, the regime wished to calm the 
apprehensions of society. The New Economic Policy's success would 
depend, as he quickly foresaw, on the establishment of much greater 
legal predictability. This did not mean that a law-based order was the 
party's objective; on the contrary, the Bolsheviks remained legal 
nihilists - and Lenin in this respect was their principal theorist. 145 
But a concordat was tacitly provided whereby citizens could sleep 
easily abed if they did not engage in activity deemed inimical to the 
regime. Discussions on a Civil Code began in higher party circles in the 
winter of 1921-1922. Lenin stipulated that the Bolsheviks should 
reserve the option of terrorist methods. In May 1921 the Cheka had 
been allowed to apply the death penalty, without reference to other 
security organs, for thefts of state property. 146 Lenin supported 
Dzierzynski despite objections from N. V. Krylenko. But Krylenko 
kept to his campaign for greater judicial formality. 147 By 1 December 
1921, Lenin had been won over, and he helped draft a Politburo minute 
for the narrowing of the Cheka's powers of arrest and for the 
reinforcement of the revolutionary tribunals as the source of judgement 
and sentencing. 148 This had been Kamenev's plea in the Civil War, and 
a commission including Dzierzynski, Kurski and him was to produce a 
draft. 149 Kamenev lobbied for the Cheka's disbandment. Incommoded 
by ill-health, Lenin left the business to his associates. 150 By 23 January 
1922 the commission was ready to report. Its main recommendation 
was for the Cheka to be disbanded, being replaced by a Main Political 
Administration (GPU) attached to the People's Commissariat of 
Internal Affairs (and chaired by the Internal Affairs Commissar). The 
turning over of the sentencing of offenders to the revolutionary 
tribunals was confirmed. 151 Predictably the Cheka's leaders objected. 
But Kamenev had not done as well as appeared. Lenin made plain, in a 
letter to the veteran Cheka leader Unszlicht, that the reform's effects 
were to be restricted. He urged Unszlicht to take Cheka staff with him 
into the Main Political Administration. In other words, the Cheka's 
abolition would be a cosmetic operation; and Lenin required an 
increase in the 'speed and force of the repressions' by the Cheka 
officers. 'Banditism' (or armed opposition to the regime) should be met 
with 'shootings on the spot'. 152 
Unszlicht, who became the deputy chairman of the Main Political 
Administration, was encouraged by Lenin to use him as an 
 244 
Lenin: A Political Life 
intermediary in the Politburo on behalf of repressive agencies. 153 Lenin 
stressed that the Bolsheviks refused to 'recognise courts that were 
above classes'.154 He also toughened up Kurski's drafts of the Civil 
Code. On 15 May 1922 he insisted that 'all aspects of activity of 
Mensheviks, S[ocialist] R[evolutionaries], etc.' should come within the 
scope of crimes punishable by death. Lenin, ex-lawyer from the Volga, 
was unfussed by legal niceties; be called for the Civil Code to have a 
propagandistic passage linking such activities to 'the international 
bourgeoisie and its struggle against us' .155 Two days later he had 
another thought. Kurski ought to avow 'the essence and justification of 
terror' in the forthcoming Code. 156 
Lenin in his last period was not a proponent of legal reform and 
universal civic rights. He had not stopped being a legal nihilist. 157 This 
was true notwithstanding his occasional interventions to save 
individuals from perdition. 158 Such a custom was reminiscent of the 
Romanov emperors. Lenin's apparent humanitarianism was displayed 
only fitfully. His intention remained to root out opposition to 
Bolshevism before it could constitute itself as an opposition. Unszlicht 
was warned 'not to be caught napping by a second Kronstadt'.' 59 
Lenin worried especially about the anti-Bolshevik parties. The 
Mensheviks and Socialist Revolutionaries were primary targets since 
the liberal and conservative political groups had been crushed in the 
Civil War. Exemplary punishment, in Lenin's opinion, was necessary. 
Dzierzynski had reported to the Central Committee on the Mensheviks 
and Socialist Revolutionaries on 28 December 1921, and a secret 
decision had been taken 'to predetermine the question of handing over 
the Central Comittee of the Socialist Revolutionaries to the court of 
the Supreme Tribunal'. Kamenev, Dzierzynski and Stalin were charged 
with oversight over the management of official publicity. 160 A decision 
on the Mensheviks was held in abeyance. 161 Lenin supported 
Dzierzynski, and on 22 February 1922 wrote to Kurski urging the 
'putting on of a series of model trials in Moscow, Piter [Petrograd: 
R. S. ], Kharkov and several other most important centres'. Not justice 
but popular propaganda should be the objective. Lenin told Kurski to 
compel the judges to strengthen repression in line with central party 
policy, not stopping short of executing the defendants. 162 
This was no passing fancy. On 27 March 1922 he answered criticism 
by the Mensheviks and Socialist Revolutionaries with the threat: 
'Kindly let us stand you against the wall for this1'163 An international 
meeting of socialists was taking place in Berlin with Bolshevik 
participation. Radek and Bukharin led the delegation from Moscow. 
 Against the Wall 
245 
These two discovered that European socialist concern about the Red 
terror might jeopardise Soviet interests at the forthcoming Genoa 
Conference. Radek promised that the trial of the Socialist Revolu-
tionaries in Moscow would not be followed by executions.164 Lenin 
was angered. Pravda on II Aprill922 carried his piece 'We Have Paid 
Too Dear', castigating Radek and Bukharin for having made undue 
concessions to the Kautskyites and their sympathisers.165 Meanwhile 
Dzierzynski had been instructed to re-examine the amnesty granted to 
the Socialist Revolutionaries in February 1919.t66 The menace to 
defendants in the Moscow trial was clear. 
Despite abiding by Radek's assurances in Berlin,167 he pressed for 
severe punishment for political resistance. The repression of the 
Mensheviks and Socialist Revolutionaries, according to Lenin, was 
only half of the business. They had also to be vilified. He wanted the 
Soviet press to conduct a campaign linking anti-Bolshevik socialists in 
Russia with 'the international bourgeoisie' .t68 They ought to be 
rubbished as unpatriotic to the point of serving as agents of foreign 
states. Popular opinion needed to be rallied to the Bolsheviks. Not 
confining this repression to politics, Lenin aimed to retaliate against 
hostile opinion in culture. The Politburo accompanied its day-to-day 
general control over the arts, science and scholarship169 with a sharp 
exemplary campaign of violence. Lenin wrote a memo to his personal 
assistant N. P. Gorbunov, who had received a request for the release of 
the distinguished chemistry professor M. M. Tikhvinski from a Cheka 
prison: 'Chemistry and counter-revolution are not mutually exclu-
sive.'170 The logic here is impeccable. But Lenin's sentiment was a sign 
of his extreme worries about groups who might influence public 
opinion against Bolshevism. His supervision of repression was close. In 
June 1921, for example, he scrutinised a list of professors - whose 
specialisms included civil engineering, zoology and music - arrested 
recently in Petrograd. His comments and recommendations about 
individuals were extraordinarily detailed. 171 
In this instance he leaned towards gentleness. 172 Usually he was less 
merciful; a book edited by the philosophers Nikolai Berdyaev and S. L. 
Frank on the ideas of the German writer Oswald Spengler induced 
Lenin to announce to Josef Unszlicht: 'In my opinion, this is like "a 
literary front" for a White Guard organisation.' 173 There was nothing 
in fact openly hostile to the Soviet government. Yet Berdyaev, an ex-
Marxist who had converted to Christianity while remaining committed 
to socialism and philosophical individualism, was compelled to go into 
emigration. The insulation of Soviet readers from thinkers who might 
 246 
Lenin: A Political Life 
deflect them from Bolshevism was an explicit aim. Dozens of 
intellectuals were expelled in 1922. Lenin worried only about the 
detailed practical results. More 'communist-litterateurs' should be 
drawn into checking whether decisions to close particular cultural and 
economic journals were appropriate. Lenin claimed that there had been 
recent cases of both premature and tardy closures. 174 
Writers who displeased him attracted his anathema. 'These,' he 
declared, 'are all open counter-revolutionaries, clients of the Entente, 
an organisation of its servants and spies and corrupters of student 
youth.' 175 Nor did he forget about that other traditional bogey of 
Bolshevism, the Russian Orthodox Church. Violence against priests 
had been relaxed under the New Economic Policy. 176 The emphasis of 
state policy, with Lenin's encouragement, lay upon vigorous atheistic 
propaganda. But the itch to repress the Orthodox Church had not 
faded. On 19 March 1922 Lenin wrote to the Politburo that the 
ecclesiastical authorities in the town of Shuya had organised a 
demonstration against the government's decree on the compulsory 
sale abroad of ecclesiastical treasures to raise funds to relieve the 
famine by the Volga. Central party leaders wanted to take advantage of 
the Church's hostility to the decree. Events in Shuya, in Lenin's 
opinion, offered a chance to return to direct repression. Trials should 
be held of Church leaders not only in Shuya but also in Moscow and 
other cities. Patriarch Tikhon should not be touched for fear of 
provoking demonstrations against the Bolsheviks. But open season was 
announced on the rest of the Church hierarchy: 'The greater the 
number of representatives of the reactionary clergy and reactionary 
bourgeoisie we manage to shoot on this basis, the better. It is precisely 
now that we should deliver a lesson to this public so that they dare not 
even think about resistance for several decades.' 177 
The Politburo met next day in Lenin's absence through illness. 178 
Out of the full members who were present, only Stalin had been 
baptised as a baby in the Orthodox Church; but they decided that the 
lapsed Orthodox Church member Vladimir Ilich Ulyanov-Lenin had 
strayed beyond the boundaries of pragmatism. The offenders in Shuya 
should certainly be arrested; but warnings should be given to priests 
not to allow a demonstration to recur; trials should be initiated only in 
instances of active resistance to the confiscation of Church treasures. 179 
This was a severe decision even if it lacked Lenin's thirst for 
bloodletting. The trial of the Shuya clergy and their friends ended 
with the death sentence being passed on the defendants on 8 May 1922. 
Trotski agreed with the convalescent Lenin's demand for execution. 
 Against the Wall 
247 
Five were then shot, and only Kamenev's intervention saved the lives 
of the rest of them. 180 
Lenin, who was known for melding ideological inclination with 
Realpolitik, had for the moment lost his touch. Possibly his illness and 
irregular attendance at the Politburo from late 192lleft him adrift. The 
disease itself perhaps induced the intermittent rages which expressed 
themselves politically in his demands for a series of executions of 
Socialist Revolutionaries and bishops. 181 In his favour it may be added 
that he retreated before the Politburo's advice. 182 He yielded to Trotski 
on religious questions. Trotski, who was as impassive as Lenin in 
ordering executions, was among the first to discern that the Orthodox 
Church could be neutered politically if the clerical faction of the 
'Living Church' were helped to prominence. Supporters of this faction 
included Bishop Antonio; they called for a massive renovation of the 
Church's internal and external policies and were willing to effect an 
accommodation with the Soviet government. 183 The need to give covert 
assistance to the likes of Bishop Antonio had already been recognised 
in Trotski's draft motion for the Politburo on 20 March 1922.184 On 15 
May, Trotski criticised Pravda's failure to play up the factional 
divisions in the Church to the party's advantage. According to Trotski, 
such propaganda would be useful in 'raking the ground for the seeds of 
atheism and materialism'. Lenin's reaction was ecstatic: 'True. 1000 
times true!' 185 
Illness, too, prevented him from day-to-day involvement in the long-
heralded trial of leading Socialist Revolutionaries beginning on 8 June 
1922. The question whether to subject the Mensheviks to the same 
treatment had been discussed again in the Bolshevik Central 
Committee. 186 But the focus was retained on the Socialist Revolution-
aries. It had been fear of the peasants that had induced Lenin to 
introduce the New Economic Policy, and it was logical for him to 
terrorise the party which was most popular among them. The charge 
sheet sought to implicate their Socialist-Revolutionary Central 
Committee, not excluding those such as Viktor Chernov who was 
then in emigration, with direct responsibility for the attempt on Lenin's 
life in August 1918, for political and military support for the White 
armies and for post-war links with the Allied governments. 187 
This was a fabrication. The Party of Socialist Revolutionaries was 
indeed involved in the episode at the former Mikhelson factory, and 
many of its members fought for Komuch against the Reds. Yet few had 
sided with the Whites. The claim was outrageous that, from start to 
finish, the Socialist-Revolutionary Central Committee had participated 
 248 
Lenin: A Political Life 
actively in the counsels of Kolchak, Denikin and Yudenich. Socialist 
Revolutionaries in a large number joined the Reds in the Civil War, 
and the Bolsheviks had recognised this by the amnesty granted to them 
in 1919. The defendants in the House of Trade Unions near the 
Kremlin were victims in what became known in the 1930s as a 'show 
trial'. Little pretence at impartiality was made; the chairman of 
proceedings was Yuri Pyatakov, Bolshevik Central Committee 
member. Speeches on the iniquity of the Socialist-Revolutionary 
leadership were made by supposedly soft-hearted Bolsheviks such as 
Nikolai Bukharin and Anatoli Lunacharski.188 Sentences of death were 
passed on 7 August on the most unbending among the defendants. The 
death sentences were suspended by the Presidium of the All-Russian 
Central Executive Committee of the Congress of Soviets on the 
following day according to the assurances given in Berlin in April by 
Radek and Bukharin. Trotski was annoyed, arguing that lives should 
be spared only if the defendants forswore hostile activity against the 
Bolshevik party and the Soviet government.189 This was tantamount to 
re-imposing the death sentences. Great courage had been displayed 
throughout the trial by most of the accused, and they were as unlikely 
to abase themselves before the Bolsheviks as the Bolsheviks would have 
bowed the knee to Aleksandr Kerenski. 
It was as well for the Socialist Revolutionaries that, while Trotski 
was challenging the commutation of the death sentences, the architect 
of the Cheka and Red Terror was out of political action; for he was 
convalescing in a sanatorium on the outskirts of Moscow. 190 Sentences 
on bishops and priests of the Orthodox Church were lightened and the 
Menshevik trial, after continued discussion in the Central Committee, 
was thought inappropriate. The Bolshevik party had shown its teeth 
and cowed its enemies. Dictatorship had been shown to mean 
dictatorship; and, while the Politburo debated practicalities of 
implementation, there was no division on principle. 
THE ELEVENTH PARTY CONGRESS 
Politburo members and the rest of the Central Committee wanted no 
interference and no upsets. The party was to be presented with 
decisions and consulted only minimally; the first year of the New 
Economic Policy, coming after the disputes of 1920-1921, had been a 
battering experience. Lenin considered it vital that a united front 
should be formed by the Central Committee, and had exerted himself 
 Against the Wall 
249 
to this end despite ill-health as preparations were made for the opening 
of the Eleventh Party Congress in Moscow on 27 March 1922. 
Although be did not say so, what he wanted above all was a quiet 
Congress, a Congress without vituperative polemics and ideological 
controversy. 
He and his colleagues carefully vetted the agenda in advance; their 
wish for a peaceful Congress caused them to avoid a fundamental 
debate on the New Economic Policy, on foreign trade, on agrarian 
measures, on the Civil Code, on Genoa. 191 The controversies were to 
be dampened down. Party unity and loyalty to the line of the Central 
Committee were the objective. The main obstacle was not the Workers' 
Opposition, which had recently sent an open letter of complaint about 
its treatment to the parties of the Communist International. 192 Nor 
were the trade unions any longer regarded as a very contentious 
topic. 193 Shlyapnikov and Tomski had ceased to be vital threats to 
Lenin's version of the New Economic Policy. But Lenin had reason to 
feel anxious about Preobrazhenski and his theses on the agrarian 
question. Lenin and Preobrazhenski had exchanged fierce criticisms 
about the impact of governmental measures upon various strata of the 
peasantry. The row had continued through the winter of 1921-1922, 
and Preobrazhenski wished to have the topic debated at the Party 
Congress194 Lenin needed to stop this at all costs; for Preobrazhenski, 
arguing before a Bolshevik party audience about the bias of such 
measures in favour of the kulak, might well meet with a favourable 
response. On Lenin's instigation, the Politburo on 20 March 1922 
rejected Preobrazhenski's theses, removed them from the Congress 
agenda and permitted Preobrazhenski only to address an unofficial 
side-gathering during the Congress proceedings. 195 Two days later the 
Central Committee confirmed this. The Politburo obtained compliance 
from it even though most Central Committee members had yet to 
scrutinise copies of Preobrazhenski's theses and Lenin's critique of 
them. 196 
The tranquillising of the Congress was also ensured by Lenin's 
willingness to deliver the Central Committee political report. His shaky 
physical condition bothered him enough to ask that a supplementary 
report should be got ready, and Kamenev was allotted this task. 197 
Minor disagreements ensued. At the same meeting of the Central 
Committee, Tomski unsuccessfully demanded the abandonment of an 
enquiry into the composition of the Soviet trade union leadership.198 
Moreover, disquiet was expressed about the Secretariat. One of its 
members, Emelyan Yaroslavski, proposed that each Department of the 
 250 
Lenin: A Political Life 
Secretariat should be headed by a Central Committee member. 199 But 
these were secondary matters. Harmony was restored by the end of this 
lengthy meeting. With its achievement Lenin looked forward to a 
Congress which would sanction the kind of New Economic Policy he 
had put in place.l00 
Proceedings began with a brief and well-received welcome from 
Lenin.201 Evgeni Preobrazhenski tried to disturb things by calling for a 
debate on party policy in the countryside; but his plea was repudiated. 
Central and local leaders had been primed to intervene against him.202 
Lenin returned to the lectern to deliver the Central Committee's 
political report. The Genoa Conference was still in process, and he 
limited himself to a few curt remarks on it and explicitly ruled out the 
certainty of success.203 His report was mainly taken up with a defence 
of the New Economic Policy. The restoration of the 'link' with the 
peasantry, he asserted, was the paramount immediate aim of the party. 
Bolsheviks needed to learn how to facilitate a resurgence of trade. 
Lenin unashamedly repeated that the stage of economic development 
reached by the country was not socialist. Soviet Russia was 
characterised rather by 'state capitalism'. Lenin lamented Bukharin's 
absence from the Congress as depriving him of the opportunity to 
debate the matter definitively.204 But he insisted that, even though the 
proletariat had supposedly become the ruling class, the economy 
remained essentially capitalistic; and he stressed the need to keep 
capitalism within acceptable bounds.205 Exactly where those bounds 
lay were not explained by him in theoretical terms. But on practical 
measures he was forthcoming. The party had expanded the New 
Economic Policy to its furthest necessary extent: 'We have spent a year 
retreating. Now we must say in the name of the party: enough!' 
Turning to the Workers' Opposition, he accused them of infantile 
behaviour since the Third Congress of the Communist International. 
They had acted impermissibly in appealing above the head of the 
Russian Communist Party to the other communist parties.206 This was 
schoolmasterly admonition. Towards the Mensheviks and other non-
Bolshevik parties he was much less restrained. Public activity would be 
answered with revolutionary courts and firing squads.207 
The New Economic Policy as it stood, Lenin urged, could and 
should be made to work. Lenin emphasised that the party already had 
sufficient political and economic power in its hands. The chief 
impediment to the advance towards communism was the country's 
low general level of culture. The Bolsheviks, constituting a small 
percentage of the population, were dependent on a large and 
 Against the Wall 
251 
ideologically alien state bureaucracy. Only when the masses had 
acquired the necessary skills in literacy and administration could the 
advance be resumed, and Lenin made clear that the tiny communist 
minority itself could not really claim competence that made it the equal 
of, far less the victor over, the bourgeoisie.208 A serious shift in 
emphasis was visible. In 1921 he had argued that the peasantry (or 
rather petit-bourgeois elementalism!) had been the basic threat to the 
regime. Not only rural revolts but also small-scale agricultural units 
had scared him. Now he gave priority to cultural development. This 
had been among his concerns for years, but never as the prime 
domestic issue. 209 
He dripped this message into the party's ear without many delegates 
noticing. If he had put 'culture' at the top of the Congress agenda, the 
reaction might have been different. Softly, softly! A good deal of his 
speech, indeed, was given over to banter. He was at the peak of his 
confidence. In the evening Vyacheslav Molotov delivered the Central 
Committee's organisational report. It rivalled Krestinski's in the 
previous year for mind-numbing detail, but was also decidedly less 
apologetic.210 Yet Nogin on behalf of the Revisory Commission spared 
little in criticism.211 The Central Committee was not given an easy time. 
Lenin was exempted from maltreatment; practically everyone who 
castigated official practices and attitudes managed somehow to cloak 
themselves with the legitimacy of the leader's past words. Mykola 
Skrypnik acclaimed Lenin's reference to the Ukraine's status as an 
independent republic.212 Preobrazhenski, however, was one of the 
exceptions. He derided the Politburo's interference even in questions 
about the price of individual food items, and expressed doubt that 
Politburo members such as Stalin could reasonably be entrusted with 
simultaneous tenure of several governmental and party posts.213 
Preobrazhenski nevertheless had no cogent answer to the problems 
he identified. His recommendation for the fonnation of an Econburo 
to accompany the Politburo, as Lenin commented, would not have 
been easy to demarcate.214 Nikolai Osinski tried to keep the central 
party leaders under attack. He explained that he had tried in vain to get 
a debate on the agrarian question in the Politburo, the Central 
Committee or the recent Party Conferences.215 Lenin's unwillingness to 
discuss the agrarian underpinnings of the New Economic Policy was 
highlighted. But to no effect. The Congress held stoutly to its agreed 
agenda. 
Next day, at session three, Lenin was attacked by Workers' 
Opposition leader Aleksandr Shlyapnikov (who nevertheless referred 
 252 
Lenin: A Political Life 
to him as Vladimir Ilich).216 An internal party grouping that should 
have been ended its life in the previous year was far from being 
moribund. There were also criticisms of Lenin which were non-
factional in origin. Dmitri Manuilski, a Bolshevik leader in Kiev, 
objected to his talking of Ukraine as an independent republic. Lenin's 
will to maintain the public fiction of several independent republics 
attracted the Skrypniks and repelled the Manuilskis, and laid a basis 
for a roaring controversy later in 1922.217 Noticeable, too, was 
Manuilski's statement that Lenin was out of touch with developments 
in Ukraine.218 Manuilski claimed to have put Lenin right in private 
conversation. Such condescension to him was an early sign that the 
next political generation was ready to prove its virility. Trotski rallied 
to Lenin. In a wide-ranging contribution he defended the New 
Economic Policy, the 'link' with the peasants, the campaign against 
factions, the use of specialists.219 
Lenin was pleased that no one bad called for the New Economic 
Policy's abandonment; and, in mock self-disdain, he turned to critics 
such as Yuri Larin and noted that the 'terroristic power' that had 
vanquished the world's armies and installed a dictatorship of the 
proletariat had yet to win victory over 'Larin's army': 'Here we have a 
total defeat!.mo Contentedly he returned to his convalescence and to 
the wires from Genoa. The Congress could proceed without him. At 
session four, Molotov was given a further grilling. Lenin declined to 
assist: it was enough for Lenin that the political and organisational 
reports of the Central Committee were passed by a huge majority.221 
Discussion was resumed on the Workers' Opposition. Aaron Solts 
from the Central Control Commission accused Shlyapnikov of gross 
misbehaviour. Shlyapnikov responded in kind. At the fifth session, on 
29 March, S. P. Medvedev and Aleksandra Kollontai took Shlyapni-
kov's side.222 Predictably, Solts's motion was accepted and the 
Congress transferred its attention to Zinoviev's report on the 
Communist International. Mikhail Tomski, rehabilitated after his 
extraordinary dispute with Lenin in April1921, followed with a report 
on the trade unions, which urged that strikes should be permitted in 
state enterprises as well as in the private sector.223 Surprisingly Trotski 
yet again spoke in support. At session six, he explained that his 
arguments for the strict subordination of the trade unions to the state 
in the controversy before the Tenth Party Congress was a corollary to 
his failure to persuade the Central Committee to drop grain 
requisitioning in February 1920. If a degree of private profit could 
 Against the Wall 
253 
not be allowed in trade, an even heavier emphasis on state control 
would be needed to restore production.224 
Trotski's rationalisation of his earlier case was incredible to those 
delegates who could remember that he had continued to call for the 
militarisation of the trade unions even after the Politburo, with his 
approval, had opted to introduce a graduated tax in kind in February 
1921; but, in tactical terms, his words had an emollient effect upon the 
Congress. They offered the chance for Trotski and Lenin to bury their 
differences. As in the Civil War, they agreed about most aspects of 
Bolshevik party policy. 
This display of amity among the central party leaders was ruined 
when speakers took exception to the apparently uncontroversial 
assertion by Trotski that 'specialists' and not workers should influence 
industrial decisions. Trotski wanted managers to be allowed to 
manage. Lenin's stress upon the tasks of cultural and technical 
development were not much at variance with Trotski's ideas. But Lenin 
wanted a quiet Congress, not a dispute on authority inside factories -
and anyway he probably did not want to put things as unreservedly as 
Trotski. Tomski bridled at Trotski's remark, and a short but bitter 
clash followed between Tomski and Trotski. Tomski made a forceful 
case that trade unions should retain a place at the table of management 
in each factory. 225 But the storm blew over. The Congress delegates, 
like Lenin, desired to avoid serious upset. As for Trotski, he proceeded 
to deliver a report on the Red Army. 226 The organisation of the armed 
forces had again become contentious in recent months. Mikhail 
Frunze, presently Ukrainian government deputy premier, called for the 
acceptance of a 'uniform military doctrine' which in Trotski's opinion 
was full of abstract theorising. Trotski stressed competence, qualifica-
tions, professional training. Congress listened to him respectfully and 
moved on to other business. 227 
Further debates followed on 30 March. Grigori Sokolnikov reported 
on the financial situation, frequently invoking the authority of his 
absent comrade Lenin.228 His optimism was challenged by Preobraz-
henski (who, interestingly for someone who was later charged with 
having an anti-peasant attitude, suggested that state was imposing too 
high an interest rate in its loans to the peasantry).229 G.l. Lomov 
asserted that Sokolnikov as People's Commissar for Finances had 
turned state industrial trusts into nests of speculative activity.230 
'Speculation' was a dirty word in the Bolshevik lexicon. Pyatakov 
joined in the assault on him. Sokolnikov, he declared, had deprived 
 254 
Lenin: A Political Life 
vital state industries of investment. Pyatakov and his supporters on the 
left of the party did not urge a return to War Communism, but their 
vision of the New Economic Policy included a continued commitment 
to the priority of state-owned, large-scale industry.231 
Consequently the fact that no one challenged the desirability of the 
New Economic Policy did not preclude the potential for dispute about 
what should be its limits. Lenin had stated that there should be no 
further retreat; but Preobrazhenski and Pyatakov at the Congress -
and they had Trotski's tacit sympathy - felt that the retreat on central 
state investment and planning was already excessive. The Bolshevik 
'leftists', as they were soon to be described, were a bomb waiting to 
explode. They had detonated themselves in a fairly controlled fashion 
at the Party Conferences in 1921, and it was only a stroke of luck that 
discouraged them from going further at the Eleventh Congress. If 
Trotski had placed himself at their head, much more destruction would 
have been wreaked. Perhaps the memory of the 'trade union discussion' 
discouraged him. Moreover, he was reluctant to make too bold a 
rupture with his Politburo colleagues at a time of Lenin's illness. For 
once, he saw sense. Sokolnikov took his castigation like a man, merely 
grumbling that Pyatakov seemed to have forgotten that the Congress 
had already sanctioned the year's activities of the Central Commit-
tee.232 The wish to heal Bolshevism's rifts took over again. At the ninth 
session on 31 March, Zinoviev reported on party recruitment measures. 
Deferential remarks abounded. Zinoviev opined in carefree manner: 
'The dictatorship of the proletariat, as comrade Lenin says, is a very 
cruel thing.' Such sententiousness was used to justify the closure of 
further recruitment to the party on the grounds that far too many 
careerists and non-Bolshevik socialists had infiltrated the ranks.233 His 
ideas were discussed at session ten; and Mikhail Kalinin, welcoming 
the consensual climate of debate, asserted with pleasure that opponents 
of the Central Committee -
Larin as well as Osinski and 
Preobrazhenski - had been directly responsible for one fifth of its 
decisions. 234 
The resolutions on trade unions and on finance were passed by vast 
majorities at session eleven on 2 April.235 The sole disturbance came 
from disagreements on the agrarian question. Under pressure from 
delegates, the party leadership had relented its ban on discussing it at 
the Congress. A Congress section had been set up to formulate a 
resolution 'work in the countryside'. Osinski was chosen to report on 
its behalf. Lenin was unhappy with the change of plan and moved to 
prevent any full-scale attack on the party's agrarian reforms. He had 
 Against the Wall 
255 
written to Osinski urging that the draft resolution should be phrased so 
as not to tie the Central Committee's hands in future. A verbal fudge, 
he maintained, was desirable. If there was to be a formal resolution, 
moreover, Lenin wanted to include clauses on permission for the hiring 
of labour and the renting of land. Osinski concurred, and - with only 
slight modifications - Lenin's proposed clauses were accepted by the 
section. 236 
Ukrainian Bolshevik leader V. Y. Chubar made an attempt on the 
Congress floor to have them excised. Not for the last time, a leading 
Ukrainian Bolshevik sought a hardening of the official line on 
agriculture.237 Osinski personalised his retort: 'Comrade Lenin clearly 
tried to fix this in place, and comrade Chubar is coming out precisely 
against it.' This did the trick. Osinski's presentation became official 
party policy.238 A final session was held that evening. Lenin, the ghost 
at the feast for most of the Congress, returned to hear Kamenev 
announce the results of the elections to the Central Committee. There 
were, this time, few surprises. Some newcomers grabbed places. Both 
Frunze and Chubar were rewarded for their outspokenness, and even 
Anastas Mikoyan's criticism of Zinoviev did not prevent him from 
being made a candidate member. The door remained closed to most 
past supporters of Trotski. Preobrazhenski, Serebryakov and Kres-
tinski were kept out; only A. A. Andreev and Christian Rakovsky, who 
had been less strident in Trotski's cause in 1920--1921, made a 
successful return. But effort was made to inhibit overt dissension: the 
normal announcement of the order of popularity in the elections was 
omitted.239 Lenin closed the proceeding with a brief address. His last 
words were more a warning than a confident statement of fact: 'Should 
there be voices is our party speaking against this ultra-slow and ultra-
cautious movement, they will be isolated. The party as a whole has 
grasped this and now will show by its deeds that it has comprehended 
the need at the present moment to construct its work precisely in this 
fashion and only in this fashion. And once we have understood this, we 
will succeed in achieving our objective!'240 
