 6 Less Politics! 
LENIN AND TROTSKJ 
Bolsheviks wanted the Soviet state to guide all public and private 
institutions in their expanding republic. Direct and comprehensive 
dominance was their objective. This is so familiar a notion from later 
communist and fascist history that the effort has to be made to 
consider how unusual it was at the time of the October Revolution and 
Civil War. Bolshevism invented it. Many earlier rulers had wanted and 
obtained autocratic power; but none had wished to subjugate each and 
every institution to its will. Even the Romanov monarchy had granted 
rights and privileges to favoured bodies, groups and individuals. Not 
even the most absolutist among the Russian emperors had envisaged 
total control as their objective. 
The Bolshevik party had expounded such an ambition soon after the 
October Revolution, and elaborated it in its party programme at the 
Eighth Party Congress in March 1919. Yet the totalitarianism of intent 
was not matched by reality. Orderliness and compliance with the 
central party leadership's commands had increased, but institutions 
operated disobediently on occasion. To some extent this flowed from 
the confusions of Civil War; and the absence of a reliable network of 
communications and trained personnel were a further obstacle to the 
construction of an all-pervasive state. Even among Bolsheviks there 
were inhibitions about the desirable scope of the state's pretensions. 
The October Revolution was meant, in Lenin's words, to introduce a 
dictatorship of the proletariat. The fact that the party had used 
violence against the working class had not eradicated a feeling among 
Bolsheviks that the interests of the workers should be protected. A 
residual belief existed that trade unions in particular should, within 
limits, fight for the rights of 'the labouring masses'. These limits were 
narrow. Only the Workers' Opposition contended that the the unions 
should not entirely accept the party's hegemony. Leading Bolshevik 
trade unionists, such as Central Committee member Mikhail Tomski, 
were comfortable with the notion of a one-party and one-ideology 
state. But it was also supposed to be a workers' state, and Tomski and 
his friends resisted the reduction of the unions to being mere 
152 
 Less Politics! 
153 
transmission-belts for the conveying of the party's instructions to the 
working class. The eruption of the strike movement, which had never 
been extinct in the Civil War, convinced Tomski that greater pressure 
on the working class would have disastrous consequences for the 
regime.1 
This was not Trotski's opinion. If the state belonged to the workers, 
he maintained, the traditional purposes of trade unions were 
redundant. Instead the unions should become primarily agencies of 
economic production. This amounted to the 'statification' of the union 
movement -and Trotski did not evade the term in his pronounce-
ments.2 He had proselytised for labour armies and for the extension of 
central state economic planning; and he did not hide his distaste for the 
Ninth Party Conference's criticisms of the 'political departments' 
which had replaced the trade unions on the railways. Trotski, People's 
Commissar of Military Affairs, requested the militarisation of Soviet 
public life. He would not take the Party Conference's reprimand lying 
down. 
That this should be his reaction was a sign of unrivalled ability to 
throw away his advantages. Stalin was licking worse wounds from the 
Conference. Trotski's continuation of his challenge to party policy 
distracted attention from Stalin's humiliation and re-focussed attention 
on Trotski. Lenin despaired of his Politburo and Red Army colleague. 
Unlike Trotski, he felt at ease with the Conference's decisions. There 
had been assaults on Lenin's management of both the Polish campaign 
and the party's internal affairs, and a resolution had been passed on the 
need to reform party organisation. Lenin coped with the Conference by 
putting it out of his mind as soon as the delegates went home. The 
establishment of a Central Commission, for example, would not deflect 
him in any way from his purposes. The burden of day-to-day decision 
was heavy. The Poles, victors at the battle of the Vistula, had to be 
watched carefully even though negotiations were in progress. The 
Entente powers were unpredictable. The Red Army was a shambles, 
and minor mutinies were occurring. Industrial conflicts broke out. The 
peasants of Russia and the Ukraine were taking up arms against the 
Soviet authorities. Food supplies to the towns were at a critically low 
level. In Lenin's estimation, these were the issues requiring urgent 
attention. He felt that Trotski had lost a sense of perspective if he 
insisted on a theoretical discussion of the role of trade unions in a 
socialist state. 
Yet the contrast drawn by Lenin between Trotski and himself was 
not fair. For a start, Trotski was resting his case on practicality as well 
 154 
Lenin: A Political Life 
as theory. He argued that economic reconstruction would succeed 
quickly only if workers were to forgo the conventional bargaining 
practices with their employers and to submit to rigorous labour 
discipline in an industrial and mining sector under central state control. 
In Trotski's opinion, the working class of 1917 no longer existed. The 
closure of enterprises; the migration into the villages; the malnutrition 
and disease in the towns; the conscription into the armed forces: all this 
had led to a collapse in the size, morale and political 'consciousness' of 
the working class. The state had to take command and, when 
necessary, coerce the workers into co-operation with the requirements 
of economic reconstruction.3 
Lenin, however, had luck inasmuch as his policy neither necessitated 
an unsettling change in the measures of the day nor confronted 
particularly fearsome adversaries; for the Democratic Centralists and 
Workers' Opposition did not much trouble him. Nor was Trotski alone 
in his propensity to lunge into theoretical abstraction at the drop of a 
hat. Lenin, as he had shown in controversy after controversy before the 
Great War and would show again in the foreign-trade discussion of 
1922, was even more likely to act in such a fashion.4 Trotski for once 
outdid him. He wanted change and wanted it fast. His abrasiveness 
towards the Democratic Centralists and Workers' Opposition did not 
cease, and he remained unapologetic about the political departments 
which had been castigated at the Ninth Party Conference by many 
local committee men who otherwise supported the Lenin-Trotski 
leadership.5 Nor did Zinoviev's attempt to rally these discontented 
supporters at the Ninth Conference give him pause for thought.6 
Trotski, convinced of his correctness, took his ideas to the lion's den: 
the Fifth AU-Russian Conference of Trade Unions. His speech on 3 
November 1920 set out the following basic proposition: 'The 
administrative-economic apparatus is nothing but the union's produc-
tion organ, i.e. its most important organ.' In case this jargon had 
mystified his listeners he added that the unions should replace their 
obligation to protect the immediate interests of their members with an 
overriding commitment to the raising of productivity. They should be 
production unions, not trade unions in the conventional sense.7 
Yet his words served to strengthen hostility to him. He was brave, 
but also unwise: he exposed himself to the charge of disregarding the 
party's supreme political role. The Central Committee met for a three-
day session starting on 8 November. Lenin would tolerate him no 
more. Tomski returned from the Conference of Trade Unions, where 
he had officially represented the Bolshevik Central Committee, and 
 Less Politics! 
155 
fulminated against Trotski. Lenin not only condoned this but gave 
himself the licence to make 'exaggerated and therefore incorrect 
"onslaughts"'.8 On his recommendation, Trotski's theses on the trade 
unions were rejected by eight votes to seven.9 It was a narrow victory. 
Pressing their case, Lenin and his group proposed counter-theses which 
were accepted by ten votes to four. 10 
But at this point something odd happened: a so-called 'buffer group' 
emerged consisting of several Central Committee members. They were 
fearful lest a split in the party's leadership might endanger the regime, 
and some also felt that a compromise between the two leaders was 
desirable. These included several who were no friends of Trotski: 
Kamenev, Zinoviev, Rykov, Artem and Tomski. Kamenev was forever 
trying to make oil mix with water in Bolshevism. 11 But Zinoviev was 
not a reconciler and Tomski had had a blazing polemic with Trotski at 
the Congress of Trade Unions; 12 Rykov had been the butt ofTrotski's 
sarcasm at the Ninth Party Congress; 13 Artem had previously hugged 
close to Lenin. 14 There were also adherents of the buffer group who 
were sympathisers with Trotski to a greater or lesser extent. These were 
on the 'left' of the Bolshevik political spectrum: Bukharin, Dzierzynski, 
Krestinski, Radek and Serebryakov. 15 Thus ten Central Committee 
members out of nineteen, including some who were absent, resolved to 
hold the two protagonists apart. Lenin was forced to back off. The 
speech he was scheduled to make to the Conference of Trade Unions 
was cancelled by order of the Central Committee. Zinoviev was 
charged in his place with making a 'businesslike and not a polemical 
report'. The Central Committee forbade its members to 'bring the 
disagreements into open discussion' and elected its own trade union 
commission under Zinoviev's chairmanship. 16 
The commission's composition was balanced equally between Lenin 
and Trotski. Lenin was represented by Rudzutak, Trotski by himself. 
The other members came from the buffer group: Rykov, Tomski and 
Zinoviev. 11 But the equality of treatment was a mere show. On 
substantive trade-union questions the composition would leave Trotski 
in a minority of one; and, if Rykov was far from Trotski's standpoint, 
Tomski and Zinoviev were still more distant. 18 Zinoviev, moreover, 
was a slippery opportunist. His espousal of moderate reform at the 
Ninth Party Conference in September 1920 was unaccompanied by 
implementation in his own political base in Petrograd. 19 Like all the 
Bolshevik leaders, he had a genuine ideological commitment. But he 
was untrustworthy in day-to-day politicking. His choice as commission 
chairman was a red rag to a bull. 
 156 
Lenin: A Political Life 
Trotski refused to participate in the charade. Nor did he accept the 
Central Committee's recommendation for the 'degeneration of 
centralism and militarised forms of work' in Tsektran to be 
reversed.2° The Waterworkers' Union was infuriated to the point of 
explosion by his intransigence. The matter came before the Central 
Committee on 7 December. Zinoviev took the side of the Water-
workers' Union and demanded the reselection ofTsektran's leadership. 
This time he was more aggressive than Lenin. Yet his assault on 
Trotski was rejected by those who, unlike Zinoviev, stayed within the 
buffer group. Lenin had gained a new ally in the person of Zinoviev. 
Rykov, too, voted on his side.21 But the buffer group's remaining 
members held firm despite the defections. Bukharin emerged as its 
leader. His views on trade unions were summarised in the slogan of 
'workers' democracy in production'. In reality he no more intended to 
provide unionists with greater influence than did Trotski. The slogan 
obfuscated Bukharin's will to impose a priority for the raising of 
productivity at the expense of workers' bargaining rights and 
immediate material interests.22 But the stand-off between Lenin and 
Trotski meant that his reduced group held the balance of power in the 
Central Committee; and, although not all of the group's members liked 
his specific slogan, it was sufficiently vague to allow them to force it 
through as Central Committee policy. This was a position akin to 
Trotski's in the Brest-Litovsk dispute in early 1918. Lenin was as 
annoyed with Bukharin in 1920 as with Trotski two years previously. 
He and his supporters insisted that a Party Congress should be 
convoked within a couple of months to resolve the disagreement one 
way or another.23 
FRONTS, POLICIES, SITUATIONS 
The Ninth Party Conference, while discomfiting all Politburo members 
including even Lenin, failed to tie them down to many specific changes 
of policy; but it certainly had pushed economic questions to the top of 
the agenda. The figures of industrial output were depressing. In 1920 
Russian enterprises produced only fourteen per cent of the total 
achieved in 1913. Agriculture, too, was in a disastrous condition. Even 
if allowance is made for the fact that the Soviet regime controlled a 
territory smaller than the former Russian empire, a grain harvest of 
forty six million tons was poor. Transport was in chaos. The towns 
 Less Politics! 
157 
had been depopulated by disease, malnutrition, conscription and the 
flight to the countryside. But the villages were hardly better ofT, and in 
central and northern Russia, where requisitioning had been hard 
throughout the Civil War, they were a great deal worse. As the Reds 
moved southwards in September and October to concentrate their 
military efforts upon General Wrangel, debate began about the ways 
available to reconstruct the economy of Russia and the peripheral 
regions of the former empire. 
The most radical proposal for changing policy in the Bolshevik party 
had come from Trotski in February 1920. It had not been debated 
outside the Central Committee; and Trotski, once worsted by Lenin's 
continued support for comprehensive grain requisitioning, dropped the 
matter.24 But at least Trotski had tried to face the economic facts. 
Lenin remained extraordinarily complacent. For the four months 
following April 1920 he made no major statement on the economy.25 
There was no comparable period, previous or subsequent, when he 
remained silent about agriculture, industry and trade. He continued to 
chair Sovnarkom and the Council of Labour and Defence so that the 
appalling evidence of collapse in industry and agriculture came 
regularly before him. 26 The Second Congress of the Communist 
International and the invasion of Poland had held his attention. As he 
came to recognise the crisis for what it was, Lenin persisted with 
existing measures. War Communism had to work better. It was 
Kalinin, not Lenin, who insisted on 14 September that the Politburo 
should establish a commission of enquiry into the conditions of the 
peasantry.27 Lenin stuck to the grain requisitioning, to the labour 
armies, to a virtual state monopoly in industry; he also reiterated his 
commitment to attracting concessionnaires into the Russian economy. 
More generally, he adhered to the objective of formulating a •single 
economic plan' for the country.28 
Visiting peasants, however, did not let Lenin forget them.29 In mid-
October a certain Belyaev told him at an open meeting that the state's 
behaviour reminded him of the folk-story of the goat, the ram and the 
lynx. By pitching the workers against the peasants, Lenin was setting 
up a situation like the fight between the goat and the ram, in which the 
lynx, whom Belyaev likened to world capitalism, could be the 
beneficiary.30 Lenin's defence of official policy was not quite as 
dogged as usual. He emphasised that the grain levy had been lowered in 
central Russia (even though he added that it had been raised in the 
south). 31 Lenin hoped to indicate that the Politburo was mindful of the 
peasantry's distress. Still more remarkably, he omitted to declare an 
 158 
Lenin: A Political Life 
anathema on free trade; and this lacuna characterised his public 
statements until late December.32 
Evidently he was less sure of himself than earlier. The last campaign 
between the Reds and the Whites was drawing to a close. Wrangel 
exploited the moment of the Soviet invasion of Poland to break out of 
the Crimea in June 1920. His forces pushed into Ukraine. But the Red 
Army was re-grouped against him after the Polish debacle. By early 
November he was back in Crimea and was forced to evacuate all his 
forces abroad. General Wrangel never returned to his native land. 
Lenin rejoiced. This was natural, but his complaint that the threat from 
Wrangel had been neglected in the summer was less justifiable: he 
himself had harassed his central party colleagues into concentrating on 
Poland.33 An armistice was agreed between Poland and the Russian 
republic in October. Negotiations continued and were far from easy. 
But the Politburo was willing to make what Trotski sarcastically 
described in anticipation as 'a collaborationist peace'.34 Claims were 
abandoned to much territory in what had been Soviet Ukraine and 
Soviet Belorussia. By March 1921, the details had been worked out and 
the diplomats met to sign the Treaty of Riga. A peace settlement was 
also agreed with the other Baltic states; and Sergo Ordzhonikidze, who 
wanted to move the Red Army over the Azerbaidzhanian border into 
Persia, was strictly countermanded.35 The military extension of the 
network of Soviet republics was to be halted in a southerly as well as a 
westerly direction. Both Turkey and the United Kingdom, with her 
Asian possessions and interests, had to be re-assured that Red bayonets 
would not be carrying Bolshevism to other countries. 
This gave Lenin the chance to re-think War Communism. Reports 
from the People's Commissariats of Food Supplies and Agriculture 
came to him and his colleagues in early December 1920.36 Both 
revealed a crisis growing more acute. Lenin edged his way towards a 
new agrarian policy. He did not trumpet it. His talent for sloganeering 
was reserved for another hobby-horse of the moment: the introduction 
of electricity to factories and other work-places. In a memorable phrase 
he claimed: 'Communism is Soviet power plus the electrification of the 
entire country!'37 
But what he also had in mind was something that drastically 
challenged the principles of current policy. This was the proposal, 
which he jotted down in advance of the Eighth Congress of Soviets, to 
reward individual peasant households for any increase in their 
productivity.38 In the Civil War the Bolsheviks had exacted taxes, 
grain and conscripts from village communes as a whole. When they 
 Less Politics! 
159 
paid anything to the peasantry, the payment also was made to 
communes. Compensation on an individual basis was thought to 
smack of indulgence to the kulak; and, even though the committees of 
the village poor were disbanded in Russia in December 1918, class 
struggle in the countryside remained the state's conscious objective. Let 
us be clear about Lenin's new thinking. He was not suggesting free 
trade; he was not aiming to abolish the state grain-price monopoly. Yet 
he intended to give incentives to any peasant household which raised its 
level of production above the local norm. Nor did he stipulate that 
better-off categories of the peasantry would be excluded from the 
scheme. This was not capitalism, but it was not much like War 
Communism either. Discussions took place in the Central Commit-
tee.39 Opinions were divided, and Lenin and Preobrazhenski were 
instructed on 20 December to draft a resolution on the agrarian 
question presentable to the Eighth Congress of Soviets.40 
On the same day Lenin gave a report to the Bolshevik fraction on 
foreign concessionnaires. He argued that they would not only assist 
economic recovery but also divide the Soviet regime's enemies among 
themselves. For example, the granting of privileges to American 
entrepreneurs in Kamchatka would set the USA against Japan.41 Lenin 
reminded his audience: 'A question such as the existence of the Soviet 
republic alongside capitalist countries, a Soviet republic surrounded by 
capitalist countries: this is such an intolerable thing for capitalism that 
any opportunity will be grasped to resume war.'42 The threat from 
abroad could not be resisted effectively by military means. The political 
division of world capitalist imperialism was vital. Lenin laid emphasis, 
as regards the threat from the west, upon improved relations with 
Germany. He was willing even to offer 'food-supply concessions' to 
Berlin. The idea was that, if given access to abandoned land in eastern 
Ukraine, German entrepreneurs would introduce tractors to the 
country's agriculture.43 
This extraordinary suggestion caused dispute. Not only the Workers' 
Opposition but many other Bolshevik speakers saw concessions as a 
betrayal of the Revolution, the proletariat, Marx and communism.44 
Lenin had greatly misjudged the adaptiveness of his party. Having been 
late in perceiving the dire condition of the economy, he had failed to 
prepare the minds of his fellow party activists before the Congress of 
Soviets. He had improvised, and learnt to his cost that even a 
modification of War Communism through profit-based rewards and 
foreign concessions would be difficult to achieve. The Congress opened 
on 22 December 1920. Lenin trimmed his report on behalf of 
 160 
Lenin: A Political Life 
Sovnarkom of those aspects which had been most contentious. 
Nevertheless it was impossible entirely to avoid conflict. The 
proposals for a system of rewarding individual peasant households 
rankled. Foreign concessions were unpopular. Disagreements in the 
Central Committee about the trade unions were being aired at the 
Congress of Soviets; and Bolshevik delegates had to be carefully 
courted if the Congress was not to turn into a fiasco. The wartime 
pressures for party unity were waning. Strife returned to the Bolsheviks 
with a vengeance. In vain did Lenin propose that 'the best politics 
henceforward will be less politics'. His stress upon the need for a 'single 
economic plan' failed to reassure everybody. Even his call for a scheme 
to bring electricity to the entire country gained little applause.45 
What saved him from humiliation was the unreadiness of Bolsheviks 
to undo him in front of the small number of Mensheviks, Socialist 
Revolutionaries and Left SRs at the Congress. The Bolshevik party's 
monopoly was not yet total, not quite. Solidarity of some basic kind 
with the party leader was essential. Furthermore, it did Lenin no harm 
that these other socialist parties were asking for a reform of economic 
policy more basic than Lenin's proposal. Chief among these demands 
was the replacement of grain requisitioning by a graduated tax-in-kind 
set at a lower general level of procurement. The remainder of the 
harvest would be left with the peasants, and they would be allowed to 
trade it on the open market.46 
Lenin dissociated himself from such an abandonment of War 
Communism. He railed against peasants who became involved in what 
the Bolsheviks called speculation. Free trade in grain was ruled out.47 
But Lenin was still not out of the woods. Polemics on the agrarian 
question were almost inevitable even when Bolshevik delegates to the 
Congress were on their best behaviour. On 24 December, Lenin 
repeated to a Bolshevik fraction meeting that a turn towards 'the 
peasant individual economy' was required.48 He shelved his con-
tentious (and unrealistic) project for German farmer-concessionnaires; 
but he continued to scoff at the existing collective farms. Their ability 
to generate agricultural recovery, in his view, was negligible.49 Even 
Lenin, however, was taken aback at the vituperative discussion which 
ensued. Despite his best efforts, the Bolshevik fraction at the Congress 
rejected the Lenin-Preobrazhenski proposals on the grounds that they 
favoured only the kulak. The Central Committee's motion was 
repudiated. Lenin was angry. Party discipline had been infringed. 
The Central Committee met in the emergency on 27 December, and 
Lenin described in graphic detail how truculent the Bolshevik delegates 
 Less Politics! 
161 
had been towards him. The fraction's attitude was condemned, and 
'the personal rewarding of industrious peasants' was again defended. 
Lenin was empowered to go back to the fraction to re-assert the policy 
of the Central Committee. 50 
And the Central Committee also offered compromise. The priority 
was to become the recompensing of the industrious commune rather 
than the industrious individual household; and no household using 
'kulak-type' methods should be eligible for reward.51 Lenin was 
jaunty.52 He acknowledged that, in practice, it was difficult to 
distinguish between an 'industrious peasant' and a kulak. But he 
simply maintained that the decisions in particular communes should be 
left to the peasants. 53 This was skimpy advice; and, as if recognising the 
political and intellectual weakness of his position, he declared that the 
Central Committee would anyway no longer treat this as a matter of 
discipline. Fraction members could, he said, vote according to 
conscience. 54 This humility did the trick. The fraction fell into line 
with the proposed compromise. 
The gruelling debates were not terminated when the Congress ended 
on 29 December 1920. The controversy about the trade unions raged 
through the New Year in public.55 In the Politburo, unbeknownst to 
the rest of the party, there persisted the dispute about concessions. 
Interested senior party officials were invited to the session of 16 
February 1921 to debate whether to sign a deal with foreign 
entrepreneurs willing to take a stake in the oil industry. The acrimony 
was such that the Politburo opted, by five votes against four, to 
prohibit an open 'party discussion'.56 The Central Committee duly 
took up the case on 24 February. Once again there were bitter 
exchanges. Lenin was forceful in his contention that the oil-wells in 
Baku in Azerbaidzhan and in Grozny in the north Caucasus were in 
such ruin that 'extreme measures' such as the introduction of foreign 
concessions were vital. Even so, it was only by eight votes to six that 
the plan was accepted in principle by the Central Committee; and, as a 
sop to the critics, Lenin had to agree to Aleksei Rykov being asked to 
investigate how the Soviet republic would go about independently 
reconstructing the oil industry if the attempt were to be made. 57 
All was turmoil for Lenin, including his more intimate life. The 
dearest friend from the pre-revolutionary era, Inessa Armand, had 
been in the south of the country convalescing. On leaving Kislovodsk 
in the north Caucasus, however, she contracted cholera and died. Her 
corpse was conveyed by train to Moscow's Kazan Station at three 
o'clock in the morning of II October 1920. Lenin was present and 
 162 
Lenin: A Political Life 
followed the coffin through the cold, snow-laden streets. No death 
since his mother's had hurt him so deeply. Angela Balabanova 
witnessed the scene: 'I never saw any human being so completely 
absorbed by sorrow, by the effort to keep it to himself, to guard against 
the attention of others, as if their awareness could have diminished the 
intensity of his grief.' 58 Lenin and Inessa probably had a sexual liaison 
of some kind before the Great War, and the emotional tie persisted. 
Recalling the earliest stage of their friendship, Inessa had written to 
him: 'At that time I was not completely in love with you, but then, too, 
I loved you greatly. Even now I could cope without the kisses; just to 
see you and talk with you would be a joy- and this could bring pain to 
no one.'59 Her passion was undisguised: 'I kiss you strongly.'60 Her 
correspondence scarcely suggests an entirely platonic relationship; and, 
when she went on a trip in February 1919, she left behind a sealed letter 
to Lenin, to be opened in the event of her death.61 Shortly before she 
died, she confessed to having 'an intense feeling' only for her children 
and for Lenin.62 Whether Lenin reciprocated her attitude to him is not 
known for certain. But a residue of tenderness persisted, and for a time 
he was emotionatly overwhelmed by her death. 
THE 'TRADE UNION DISCUSSION' 
It had taken the crisis among the party leaders for the Central 
Committee to resume its importance. The Politburo had previously 
been formulating policies, the Orgburo and Secretariat handling 
administrative business with little interference. Even so, the Central 
Committee was not influential for very long. On 24 December it finatly 
gave permission for debate to be opened on the trade unions;63 and its 
members, instead of sitting in semi-permanent session as during the 
Brest-Litovsk controversy, took their respective cases to the rest of the 
party to make their case. Trotski's impatience had proved ungovern-
able. Next day he brought out his pamphlet, The Role and Tasks of the 
Trade Unions, for presentation to the Eighth Congress of Soviets. He 
ignored requests to wait until the Party Congress. 
This pamphlet asserted that the fate of the Revolution was in the 
balance. The rights and activities of trade unions were a foil for 
broader deliberations on centralism, hierarchy, electivity, social rights 
and economic development in a socialist state. Overt political battle, 
which quickly became known euphemisticatly as the 'trade union 
 Less Politics! 
163 
discussion', commenced on 30 December under the gaze of the 
Bolshevik party fraction at the Congress of Soviets. Lenin and 
Zinoviev stood together against Trotski. Bukharin tried to place 
himself between them; but the weight of his arguments was evidently 
less unfavourable to Trotski than to Lenin and Zinoviev.64 At any rate 
this was not merely a bilateral struggle. Shlyapnikov, too, entered the 
fray; but, if the Central Committee members were agreed on anything, 
it was that the Workers' Opposition had to be crushed. Lenin 
concentrated his fire on Trotski. Not for the first time he declared 
that few issues of general principle divided them. The notion that trade 
unions should help to raise productivity had been settled at the Ninth 
Party Congress in March 1920.65 But Trotski had given himself up to 
abstractions: 'Why is the working class to be defended, and from 
whom, since the bourgeoisie doesn't exist and the state is a workers' 
state?' Lenin declared that the working class still needed unions to 
protect its interests.66 After contemptuously dismissing both the buffer 
position and the Workers' Opposition, he urged support for a set of 
theses on the unions drawn up by fellow Central Committee member 
Jan Rudzutak. He had overlooked them when Rudzutak had offered 
them to the Fifth All-Russian Conference of Trade Unions a month 
previously; but these now became the official Leninist platform. 67 
Lenin emphasised, in an off-the-cuff remark, that the Soviet state 
was 'not a workers' but a workers' -and-peasants'' state. He did not 
argue this through to the end. Bukharin obviously thought that he 
detected a theoretical gaff, and made an interjection to Lenin's speech: 
a rare occurrence by 1920.611 It was one of those nice points of 
Bolshevism. Before the October Revolution, Lenin had called for the 
inception of the 'dictatorship of the proletariat and the poorest 
peasantry'.69 Bukharin noticed that 'workers'-and-peasants' state' as a 
formula did not stipulate that only the poorest peasants would serve as 
the proletariat's fellow holders of power. But Lenin disdained to enter 
debate on the topic.70 His own intention- and again we have to guess 
in the absence of hard evidence- was to stress that party policy had to 
take account of the fact that the urban working class constituted only a 
small proportion of the population.71 But he sensed that Bukharin 
might attack him on the grounds of this formula; and, instead of 
defending it, he went on to the offensive by suggesting yet another 
formula and stated that 'ours is a workers' state with a bureaucratic 
distortion. ·n 
Lenin had come upon a formula that would see off his adversaries: it 
conveyed pride in the results of the October Revolution while 
 164 
Lenin: A Political Life 
indicating that the workers had a continuing need of protection by 
trade unions. It also involved a shift in emphasis towards the 
standpoint taken by Zinoviev and Rudzutak. Lenin exploited the 
advantage he held through having a majority in the commission on 
trade unions set up by the Central Committee. The commission 
completed a draft decree for the Tenth Party Congress, and Lenin and 
his colleagues signed their approval of it on 14 January 1921. These 
included nine Central Committee members and a further member of 
the trade-union commission, and the document became known as the 
Platform of the Ten. Quickly it was followed by the issuing of rival 
platforms by the buffer group, the Democratic Centralists, the 
Workers' Opposition and lesser groupings.73 Much bargaining went 
on. Lenin's surge continued and Bukharin made overtures to Trotski. 
A compromise was reached whereby the buffer group would campaign 
with Trotski so long as he ceased to advocate the retention of labour 
armies.74 It did them little good. Trotski had started with considerable 
support in Moscow, Petrograd and the provinces. But by early 
February 1921 even the Urals Regional Committee, where his 
popularity was at a peak, had moved away from him.75 On Lenin's 
side, the campaigning was done mainly by Zinoviev who pursued 
Trotski across the country on whistle-stop tours like those which 
became typical of American presidential campaigns. Weeks before the 
Tenth Party Congress it was obvious that the Platform of Ten had 
won. 
But Trotski could have no complaints. Despite having most Central 
Committee members on his side, Lenin could not manipulate the 
administrative levers of a Secretariat staffed by Trotski's sympathisers: 
Krestinski, Serebryakov and Preobrazhenski. Nor did Lenin's attempt 
to demonstrate that Trotski and Bukharin misunderstood Marx's 
doctrines make much difference.76 The underlying explanation is that 
Lenin stood for party unity and was able to portray Trotski as a 
splitter. Trotski's advocacy of militarised trade unions was also 
resented for its diminution of the authority of the party. The record 
of his anti-Bolshevism before 1917 was not forgotten. Trotski reacted 
by claiming that Lenin's indulgence to the unions was a rhetorical ploy. 
To a large extent Trotski was right (even though it is equally true that 
Lenin was hostile to the extreme anti-unionism of Trotski). And yet 
Bolsheviks in the localities faced conditions which could no longer be 
handled exclusively by command and violence. Industrial strikes were 
growing in number and intensity. Trotski could not explain how he 
would stop them without bloodshed. 
 Less Politics! 
165 
Shlyapnikov was Lenin's next target. The Workers' Opposition was 
organisationally loose and politically diffuse. Yuri Milonov, the 
Samara provincial party leader was unwitting to call for the 
abrogation of the party's dominance over the soviets and trade 
unions; and E. N. lgnatov, a Bolshevik official in Moscow, wished to 
supply the soviets with the right to veto appointments in the trade 
unions. Both baulked at the request of Shlyapnikov and Aleksandra 
Kollontai for an equitable division of powers among party, soviets and 
trade unions. The necessity of coming to the Party Congress with an 
agreed platform intensified debate among sympathisers of the Work-
ers' Opposition. The result was a triumph for Shlyapnikov and 
Kollontai. 77 But in the party as a whole this mattered little. The 
freedom of the Lenin-versus-Trotski controversy was not extended to 
Shlyapnikov. Zinoviev, pseudo-prophet of internal party democracy 
since September 1920, clamped down on Workers' Oppositionists in 
Petrograd. They were entrenched in a few cities such as Samara and 
Nizhni Novgorod, where they gave more generous treatment to their 
opponents than they themselves received elsewhere. 78 Lenin castigated 
Shlyapnikov as an anti-party syndicalist and his ideas as a 'syndicalist 
deviation' from Bolshevism.79 Lenin ignored the evidence. Shlyapnikov 
did not want to abolish the Bolshevik party; his platform was not 
designed to entrust the working class with untrammeled power. He was 
not a syndicalist, and Lenin knew it. Yet Lenin, having been patient 
with his party critics until the Eighth Congress of Soviets in December, 
had his blood up. Not only Shlyapnikov but also Bukharin, who had 
said that ultimately the trade unions should be turned into bodies 
controlling the entire industrial sector, were denounced for having 
supped with short spoons with syndicalism.80 
Lenin introduced a philosophical dimension to the discussion: 
always a sign of his irritation. Bukharin, in order to show that 
Lenin's case on the trade unions was one-sided, had taken a paradigm 
from the physical world. Thus a glass on any table could be defined as 
a cylinder or equally well as an instrument for drinking. Lenin 
interjected that its definition might also include its capacity as an object 
to be thrown. Such sarcasm prefaced a recitation of Bukharin's sins:he 
failed to understand Marxian dialectics, indulged in eclecticism, had 
not read Hegel and showed ignorance of Plekhanov. Oh dear! Comical 
as this is as a response to Bukharin's perfectly ordinary and innocent 
turn of speech, it was written in earnest: 'In parenthesis it is 
appropriate to note for the benefit of young party members,' asserted 
Lenin, 'that it is impossible to become a conscious, real communist 
 166 
Lenin: A Political Life 
without studying -
and truly studying -
everything written by 
Plekhanov on philosophy since this is the best of the entire 
international literature of Marxism.'81 
TOWARDS THE NEW ECONOMIC POLICY 
The 'trade union discussion' prolonged the diversion of the leadership's 
attention from problems which had begun to be addressed, however 
imperfectly, at the Ninth Party Conference of September 1920. A 
Politburo decision was taken on 28 January 1921 enjoining Trotski and 
Zinoviev, who were on an investigatory mission for the Council of 
Labour and Defence in the Urals, to relegate questions about the trade 
unions to the background. 82 The crisis in food supplies was at last put 
at the top of the official agenda. Yet this could hardly be counted as a 
virtue. Failure to secure grain for the towns would have left urban 
Russia to starve; and in any case the policy of requisitioning all seizable 
harvest surpluses remained intact.83 
The dangers for Bolshevism were on the increase. Strikes by factory 
workers broke out throughout urban Russia. Demands for an end to 
the one-party state, to authoritarian work discipline, to food shortages 
and to the grain-picket squads were commonplace. Bolshevism was 
losing a dangerously large section of the social class that provided the 
rationale for the October Revolution.84 Rumblings were heard also in 
Kronstadt, where the naval garrison was sick and tired of Lenin's 
regime. The same grievances were aired; and, although the Mensheviks 
and Socialist Revolutionaries moved among the sailors, the impetus to 
mutiny was no more the exclusive result of their agitation than it was 
amidst the working class. Resentment of Bolshevik political and 
economic policies within a garrison that had supplied the shock troops 
for the party in 1917 was reaching boiling point. In addition, the 
possibility existed that Petrograd workers and Kronstadt sailors might 
combine their rebellious energies.85 In the countryside there was a fast-
spreading blaze of anti-Bolshevism. Provinces in the Volga region, in 
Ukraine and in western Siberia were consumed by peasant revolts.86 
All patience with the Reds had gone. The peasantry hated the 
continuation of the forcible requisitioning of food, the imposition of 
labour duties and the military conscription of their young men; and 
their discontent was clearly focussed on the Bolshevik party and its 
commissars.87 The Socialist Revolutionary A. S. Antonov, a local 
 Less Politics! 
167 
leader, put himself at their head and incurred Lenin's wrath as having 
manipulated the minds of Tambov's peasants.88 But the peasants 
would have risen even without an Antonov. They were determined to 
secure justice for their cause, and offered a still greater threat to Lenin 
and his associates in 1921 than they had to Kerenski in 1917.89 
The Politburo met again on 2 February 1921. Trotski and Zinoviev 
had left for their inspection of the economic situation in the Urals, and 
their absence gave an enhanced role to Bukharin. Lenin, Kamenev and 
Stalin agreed with him that the People's Commissariat of Food 
Supplies under A. D. Tsyurupa had destroyed the capacity of 
agriculture to recover in several provinces. A decision was taken to 
'point out to com[rade] Tsyurupa that the political situation and the 
uprising of the peasants absolutely demands the most serious attention 
to the rapid implementation of a food-supplies price discount in places 
where the peasants are especially suffering from the bad harvest and 
are in especially severe need as regards feeding themselves'.90 Siberia 
and the Caucasus were discussed;91 but it was Tambov that caused 
trepidation in the Politburo. Military force was to be sent there in 
strength; and, presumably out of distrust of Tsyurupa, the Orgburo 
was to co-ordinate the various efforts.92 
At first sight it was a bit rich of Lenin to harass Tsyurupa. The policy 
of the People's Commissariat of Food Supplies, and the quotas it 
administered to particular provinces, had been regularly scrutinised by 
Politburo and Sovnarkom.93 Even so, Tsyurupa's distaste for the 
changes proposed by Bukharin was real. The Politburo felt that he had 
to be brought into line. It is also clear that the striking workers and 
mutineering sailors did not yet unduly bother Lenin and his associates. 
The impetus for reconsidering general party policy came from the 
peasants in revolt. Almost all the debates at the Politburo on 2 
February revolved around the clash between the peasantry and the 
regime. The danger areas were growing in number; the Politburo was 
agitated not only about Tambov but also Kursk, Ore!, Penza, 
Pokrovsk, Samara, Saratov and Voronezh.94 Industrial products were 
to be distributed 'for political reasons as the first priority'.95 In other 
words, the wish to be reconciled with the peasants stemmed from fear 
about the party's destruction and not from philanthropical concern. 
Equally interesting is the lack of Lenin's prominence in the debate. It 
had been Bukharin who had raised the topic, and Preobrazhenski who 
was entrusted with drafting a set of practical measures. Preobrazhenski 
was to complete his labours by the evening and consultations were to 
take place with absent Politburo members Trotski and Zinoviev.96 
 168 
Lenin: A Political Life 
And yet, although a psychological gap had been crossed on 2 
February, a vaster ideological chasm lay ahead. Emergency relief and 
emergency repression might work in the short term. But Preobraz-
henski's remit did not include the one policy which would be the 
minimum reform acceptable to the peasantry: the abandonment of 
requisitioning the entire grain surplus in favour of a tax-in-kind fixed at 
a level low enough to allow peasants to trade a part of their stocks in 
local markets.97 Since the October Revolution the tendency of 
Bolshevik policy had been in the direction of reinforced state 
regulation of the economy. Private enterprise was a pejorative term 
in the party. An ideology which had been solidly anti-entrepreneurial 
before 1917 had become diamond-hard in the Civil War. 
But Lenin had been shaken into re-thinking his own attitudes more 
and more deeply. He had taken detailed notes on grievances expressed 
at a special meeting of non-Bolshevik peasant delegates at the Eighth 
Congress of Soviets on 22 December 1920.98 In addition, he visited 
certain villages in Moscow province: Yaropolets on 14 November 1920 
and Modenovo on 15 December 1920.99 Moscow province was not the 
whole of the Russian republic; but at least he could directly witness 
rural conditions in a fashion that he had avoided in the Civil War. 
Peasants also streamed into the capital seeking an audience with the 
Soviet leader throughout the winter of 1920-1921. 100 Quite what these 
various visitors proposed to him, and how directly, is discernible only 
partially. Their memoirs were to be written within a political 
environment that brooked no criticism of the Bolshevik party and 
Soviet government; and, in any case, the nature of his office was bound 
to deter people from speaking frankly even to a man of Lenin's 
renowned approachability. At his meeting with peasants at the Eighth 
Congress of Soviets, for example, apparently no one urged the 
replacement of requisitioning with a tax in kind set at a lower level 
of procurement.101 Only the Menshevik and Socialist Revolutionaries 
at the Congress proper made this demand. 102 The first Bolshevik 
official to do so in Lenin's presence was V. N. Sokolov. In a private 
audience late on 2 February, Sokolov as member of the Siberian 
Revolutionary Committee predicted disaster unless a substantial 
lowering of requisition-quotas was quickly announced and the 
peasantry was permitted to trade its resultant grain surplus. 103 
Did Sokolov finally change Lenin's mind? The answer is not known. 
At a conference of metal-workers on 4 February 1921 Lenin merely 
hinted at the direction of his thought. He phrased himself in Marxist 
abstraction, dwelling on the 'relations of the workers to the peasants' 
 Less Politics! 
169 
(whereas the real problem was the state's relationship with the 
peasants). 104 He wandered round the topic, expressing worry lest the 
peasantry, impoverished and starving, might follow the example of 
Hungary in 1919 and fall 'under the power of the gentry landlords'. 105 
This argument was specious: Russian and Ukrainian peasants lit no 
candles for the departed landowners. But the outlandishness of his 
words signalled the urgency of the situation; and when he touched on 
future policy vis-a-vis relations between workers and peasants, he 
heralded the introduction of new measures: 'We are not against a 
revision of these relations.' 106 
The meaning of this still very vague utterance was clarified at the 
Politburo on 8 February. Four full members were present: Lenin, 
Kamenev, Stalin and Krestinski. Trotski was in the Urals with 
candidate member Zinoviev; and candidate members Bukharin and 
Kalinin did not attend despite being in Moscow at the time. 107 It was at 
this meeting that Lenin, having listened to a report by Deputy People's 
Commissar for Agriculture N. Osinski, wrote his 'Preliminary Rough 
Draft of Theses Concerning the Peasants' .108 It was the most historic 
discussion since the Brest-Litovsk controversy of 1918. Lenin's jottings 
were the basis of what became known as the New Economic Policy. A 
tax in kind, set at a lower level of procurement than had been sought in 
the previous year, was to be instituted. The aim was 'to expand the 
freedom of the cultivator to use his surpluses over and above the tax in 
local economic exchange'; and to ensure that the fiscal regulations 
rewarded peasants who increased their output. 109 This astonishing 
reversal of policy was made without any prior deliberation in public. 
Lenin's draft was scribbled out on a single sheet of paper and handed 
to a working party consisting of Kamenev, Tsyurupa and Osinski. 
These were to report back to the Politburo after a fortnight. 110 No 
Politburo resolution was recorded on the proposed change of policy; 
and Lenin, in contrast with his behaviour in the Brest-Litovsk 
discussions, held back from joining this crucial working party. 
Knowing that a proposal to 'expand the freedom of the cultivator' 
was antithetical to the mood of the party, he acted stealthily before the 
Party Congress. The intra-party discussions in early 1918 had nearly 
broken up the party. Already the Bolsheviks were at sixes and sevens 
about the trade unions; and, at a moment of peasant revolts, Lenin had 
to handle his collapsible party with extreme care. 
The proposed tax in kind would not be implemented gently; there 
would on the contrary be intensified violence against the peasantry. 
Politburo meetings throughout February decided the personnel and 
 170 
Lenin: A Political Life 
practical measures needed to crush the resistance to Bolshevik party 
power. 111 The menace was perceived that, if the tax in kind were to be 
given publicity before the beginning of the spring sowing, the peasants 
would hide grain stocks from the People's Commissariat of Food 
Supplies so that profits might be made later. The country needed the 
grain immediately. 112 Peasants were not to be given everything they 
wanted. The 'Preliminary Rough Draft' fell far short of restoring the 
private commercial rights of the pre-1917 period. A free national 
market was not envisaged. 113 
On 16 February 1921 the Politburo decided to sanction a press 
debate on the pros and cons of a tax in kind. A cautious approach was 
maintained: the participants would be lesser Bolsheviks and not the 
party's leaders. 114 Next day Pravda carried an article by P. Sorokin and 
M. Rogov in favour of a new tax; 115 a ripost from V. Filippov appeared 
shortly afterwards. 116 By 18 February the Politburo commission 
chaired by Kamenev had produced a draft decree. Several amend-
ments had been made to Lenin's sketch. The commission called for the 
tax level for the country to be set at 350 million puds of grain. 117 This 
was only a sixth lower than in the previous year under the 
requisitioning policy. The rationale for so high a level is unclear. 
Tsyurupa's dislike of the reform may have had its effect; or perhaps it 
was calculated that the recent conquest of the Transcaucasus and parts 
of the Ukraine would make the task of the tax collectors much easier. 
Another amendment balanced the original intention of encouraging 
agricultural production with a concern to protect the interests of the 
poorer peasants. 118 The Politburo convened on 19 February. 
Tsyurupa's objections were argued so forcefully that the commission 
report was forwarded to Central Committee members. 119 Neither 
Lenin nor anyone else in the Politburo looked on the reform with 
enthusiasm, and no one wanted to incur unpopularity for pushing it 
through without the consent of most party leaders. The Central 
Committee duly met on 24 February, and accepted the commission 
report. 120 The Rubicon was crossed. Both the tax in kind and the 
permission for peasants to trade their grain surpluses were to be rapidly 
introduced. 
The decision was as yet secret. The Politburo, while keeping 
Sovnarkom in the dark about its deliberations, 121 set up another 
commission on 19 February. Its members were technical experts on the 
policy and statistics of food supply: N.l. Muralov, P. I. Popov and the 
awkward Tsyurupa. These proceeded to excise 'local economic 
exchange' from Kamenev's earlier draft. Their aim was to restrict the 
 Less Politics! 
171 
peasants to bartering with the People's Commissariat of Food 
Supplies, which had access to the warehouses of the state-owned 
factories. 122 It was a blow for the consensus achieved in the Politburo; 
but even Lenin, while disagreeing with Tsyurupa, had opposed the re-
emergence of middlemen who would take grain for sale in other towns. 
In addition, the Red Army was to quell revolts and to supervise the 
spring sowing. The state's civilian organs, too, were to increase their 
regulation of the agrarian sector of the economy. The People's 
Commissariat of Agriculture was instructed by Sovnarkom on 22 
February to draw up long-term plans for submission to the State 
Planning Commission. An entire economy run from Moscow remained 
the objective. 123 
Nevertheless Lenin might not have reconciled the Party Congress to 
the tax in kind if popular rebellions had not intensified. It was by no 
means universally accepted in the party that a lowered level of state-
procured grain would alleviate urban food-supply difficulties; and the 
vehemence of the Bolshevik fraction's reaction to the much milder 
proposal for agrarian reform made by Lenin and Preobrazhenski at the 
Eighth Congress of Soviets lingered in the Politburo's memory. And 
yet, as the Politburo assembled on 28 February, the grievances of 
workers and sailors could no longer be ignored. Strikes and food 
shortages shook the minds of all Bolsheviks in Moscow. The Moscow 
situation was so serious that Trotski, who had just returned from the 
Urals, was appointed as 'chairman of the defence committee of the city 
of Moscow'. 124 Suddenly it was recognised that rural revolts were not 
the only ones which could bring down the government. Zinoviev had 
meanwhile returned to Petrograd to find even worse difficulties. The 
Kronstadt naval garrison was in constant agitation. Strikes broke out 
in Petrograd, and an anti-Bolshevik leaflet campaign had been 
organised. 125 The Politburo called in the Cheka. Arrests of active 
Mensheviks and Socialist Revolutionaries, including those who were 
factory labourers, were demanded. The Politburo recalled Dzierzynski 
immediately to Moscow to take charge again of the Cheka. 126 
This scale of opposition to the party had not existed since spring and 
summer 1918. On 2 March the Kronstadt garrison, having been 
disobeying orders for two whole days, arrested their pro-Bolshevik 
commanders and political commissars. Mutiny had erupted with a 
vengeance. And yet deliberations on the proposed tax in kind were held 
over until the Central Committee plenum of7 March 1921.127 A last-
ditch effort was made by opponents of reform. The original advocates 
of the tax were denounced by some Bolshevik activists as being 
 172 
Lenin: A Political Life 
Socialist Revolutionaries (as indeed Sokolov had once been);128 and 
the tax was said to involve a re-installation of 'bourgeois relations' in 
the economy (as in fact it did). 129 From Bolshevik leaders in the 
Ukraine, including the entire Ukrainian Central Committee, there had 
come a protest that a tax in kind would impede the People's 
Commissariat of Food Supplies from extricating any grain whatsoever 
from the peasants at a time of an anti-Bolshevik peasant revolt across 
the southern provinces. Food-supply officials were being slaugh-
tered.130 
But Lenin held firm. Writing to Trotski on 3 March, he had argued 
that such revolts were evidence for the case 'not against the tax but in 
favour of a strengthening of military measures' .131 Nor did he fait to 
emphasise that the contents of the Ukrainian Bolshevik protest had 
acknowledged that the local working-class population already 
demanded such a reform so that they could barter with the 
peasantry. 132 The Central Committee in Moscow fell into line with 
the Politburo's recommendations. On 7 March its plenum set up yet 
another commission to prepare yet another draft decree for the Party 
Congress. This time Lenin took charge, becoming commission 
chairman. The other members were Kamenev, A. D. Tsyurupa and 
G.l. Petrovski. 133 They restored the clause on 'local economic 
exchange' which had been removed by Tsyurupa. Peasants were to 
receive the freedom to barter with citizens in the nearest town as well as 
with the officials of the People's Commissariat of Food Supplies. 134 
Tsyurupa was defeated. Lenin had pushed through a reform by 
methods different from those used in his victory over the Brest-Litovsk 
treaty. Caution, consultation and the cultivation of willing allies had 
done the trick. Now, at the moment of triumph, he would go before the 
Party Congress with the support of the most influential figures in the 
Central Committee. Personality alone had not worked its magic. 
Without the drastic worsening in circumstances in February and 
March, he might have been as unsuccessful as at the Eighth Congress 
of Soviets. But it is equally true that, if Lenin had not headed the 
campaign for reform, the proposal would probably not have reached 
the agenda sheet of the Tenth Party Congress. 
LENIN'S COHORT 
The party remained in a condition of shock at the divergence between 
Lenin and Trotski over the trade unions. There were many children in 
 Less Politics! 
173 
the country who grew up thinking that the October Revolution had 
been led by an individual called 'Lenintrotski' .135 In 1918, during the 
Brest-Litovsk disrute, Lenin and Trotski had avoided trenchant 
mutual criticisms. 36 The world at large assumed that an identity of 
viewpoint characterised their work in the Civil War. The wrangles of 
1920-1921 were all the more astounding. The London magazine Punch 
carried a detailed pen-and-ink sketch of Trotski brawling in an office 
and knocking askew a wall-picture of Lenin. 137 
Trotski had been reckless. He knew he was talented and let everyone 
know it. He could write as well as Tocqeville and Burke; he could orate 
like Demosthenes and Churchill (and without their need for textual 
self-preparation); he could organise a war-machine with the skill of 
Ludendorff. Not satisfied with his superiority, he treated his comrades 
with disdain. 138 Only Lenin was recognised by him as equally talented 
as himself: the rest of the Central Committee were subject to his airy 
dismissiveness; and, coming into a room of commanders and political 
commissars, he was quite capable of letting his cloak fall to the ground 
and leaving someone else to pick it up. 139 He was tall by Russian 
standards and handsome; he took scrupulous care of his sartorial 
appearance. 140 He could not bring himself to commune with his 
colleagues on their level. He scoffed at the plodding demeanour of 
provincial party leaders like Vyacheslav Molotov. And, when Molotov 
retorted that not everyone could be a genius, Trotski refused to act 
graciously. 141 He read French novels at Central Committee meetings 
when the proceedings bored him- as often they did. 142 As a day-to-day 
politician, he was his own worst enemy. He had thousands of admirers; 
and some of these, like Nikolai Krestinski and Adolf Joffe, were 
Central Committee members. But consultation was not his style. It 
never occurred to him that others might not admire him and might 
even regard him as threatening to become the October Revolution's 
dictator. 
Lenin and Trotski knew that such a menace was not as acute as it 
appeared. Trotski had been asked by Lenin in the October Revolution 
to become People's Commissar for Internal Affairs. He had refused; 
for he felt that his Jewish background would make him an 
inappropriate choice in a country where anti-semitism was rife. He 
had been reluctant to accept the request to take over the People's 
Commissariat of Military Affairs in 1918; and he later noted how the 
White armies had used his Jewishness as political ammunition in the 
Civil War. 143 Trotski implied a need to operate within a team in order 
to have an impact. To be sure, he may have been exaggerating concern 
 174 
Lenin: A Political Life 
about his ethnic origin in order to avoid receiving certain posts.144 
Furthermore, his readiness to turn the party upside down in pursuit of 
his preferred policies was demonstrated by the 'trade union discussion'; 
and his behaviour after Lenin's death hardly betokens a person 
reluctant to inherit the position of dominant party leader. 
Nevertheless in the winter of 1920-1921, while Lenin enjoyed the 
appearance of good health, Trotski fought him over policy only; there 
was no attempt to reduce Lenin in importance. But the controversy 
seriously marred both their relationship and his reputation in the party. 
Trotski was undoubtedly putting a sincere case, and he was right to 
argue that the trade-union question touched on almost every aspect of 
the party's strategy: state power, economic reconstruction, workers' 
rights, local self-government; but he should also have known that the 
average party official, tried and tested in the heat of the military 
conflict of 1917-1920, felt that debate was a luxury which was ill-
affordable by the Bolsheviks. Less talk, more action! Scarcely a month 
passed when Lenin omitted to make such a comment. Trotski could 
have learned with advantage from Lenin's refusal to give ideological 
hostages to fortune. Trotski admitted that what he sought was a 
properly-working 'bureaucracy' .145 Lenin wanted the same objective, 
but omitted to say this directly: the term was repugnant to the Marxist 
tradition. The distrust of Trotski grew. Nothing was known in public 
about his refusal of posts because of his Jewish ancestry. Instead the 
talk among Bolshevik party officials was that, with his power-base in 
the Red Army, he might become the Napoleon of the Soviet regime. 
Bolsheviks thought much about the precedents in the history of the 
French Revolution. Trotski's non-Bolshevik past and his abrasive 
treatment of the party in 1918-1920 gave grounds for the fear that a 
Bonapartist counterrevolution might be undertaken under his leader-
ship.J46 
Lenin meanwhile gained from his evident wish to deflect the party 
from a damaging discussion. He put a year of disastrous activity 
behind him, and his role in the party as the healer of political wounds 
was reinforced. Even Aleksandr Shlyapnikov in the Workers' 
Opposition spoke respectfully about him (whereas Shlyapnikov's 
abhorrence of Trotski was so intense that he refused to make common 
cause with him in 1923 when Trotski at last spoke in favour of internal 
party reform). 147 Moreover, little love was lost between the Workers' 
Opposition and the Democratic Centralists. Shlyapnikov's ideas were 
regarded by Sapronov as a deviation from Marxism. Lenin's motley 
adversaries used their strongest venom in attacking each other. It was 
 Less Politics! 
175 
as if the sole way open to them to prove that they were still Joyal 
Bolsheviks was to refer affectionately to 'Vladimir Ilich' .148 
Lenin gathered up this windfall of luck; but he also made the fruit 
tumble from the tree by shaking it. He restricted his own participation 
in the verbal free-for-all. A few jests were made by him at Trotski's 
expense. If the trade unions were so badly run, he suggested, how about 
letting Trotski and Krestinski take them over in a new duumvirate. 149 
But this was hardly strong invective, and it only became public 
knowledge when Zinoviev divulged it. Zinoviev hurried round the 
major party organisations on Lenin's behalf, talking stingingly about 
the People's Commissar for Military Affairs. Those Bolsheviks who 
had been at the front in the Civil War, he emphasised, had scant 
understanding of conditions and possibilities in the rear. 150 Lenin's 
reference to Krestinski touched a raw nerve. There was an obvious 
danger that Trotski would make privileged use of the Central 
Committee Secretariat. Lenin would have certainly have done so if 
he thought he could have got away with it. Krestinski was on Trotski's 
side in the controversy; and Preobrazhenski and Serebryakov belonged 
to the 'buffer group' headed by Bukharin. 151 This group, forced to 
come off the fence dividing Lenin and Trotski, scared Lenin in 1921 by 
deciding initially in favour of Trotski. 152 And yet the Secretariat kept 
an impartial stance while its troika took Trotski's part. There was no 
undercover campaign, no Trotskyist faction. Zinoviev's men tried to 
pretend that skulduggery was afoot. F. F. Raskolnikov (who headed 
the political administration in the Baltic fleet) claimed that the rumour 
had been put about that 'Trotski and his supporters wanted to drive us 
to prison, hard labour and iron bars.' 153 Zinoviev's platform, more 
than Lenin's, conceded that appointmentism was a problem in the 
party. In fact the Petrograd party organisation was directed with 
negligible regard for democratic procedures. But Zinoviev was a 
capable demagogue and discerned the weakness in the defences of his 
opponents. 154 
Trotski's unwillingness to trade insult for insult was matched only by 
his aversion to political compromise. Lenin revelled in verbal 
ambiguity. He even wriggled out of announcing his own platform -
which was unpredented in the party's debates - by encouraging a 
young and obscure trade union official, Jan Rudzutak, to produce a 
form of words congenial to his group. 155 At last, as defeat approached, 
Trotski yield a little. Bukharin and the 'buffer group' delivered the 
ultimatum that they would not back him unless he revoked his ideas on 
'labour armies'. At a time of strikes and mutinies there could be little 
 176 
Lenin: A Political Life 
prospect of prolonging their existence, and Trotski complied. But it 
was too little, too late. Party organisation after organisation, despite 
Trotski's visits to them in person, came over to Lenin's side. Weeks 
before the Tenth Party Congress Lenin had won the 'trade union 
controversy' .1 56 
His victory required consolidation by changes of personnel. Lenin 
restrained his associates from taking heavy revenge upon Trotski, and 
argued that only two thirds of the seats in the new Central Committee 
should be saved for themselves. 157 Such magnanimity was not to 
everyone's taste. A cabal of fifteen leading 'Leninists' was addressed by 
him as the Congress gathered in Moscow. Here Lenin put the case that 
Trotski should be included on their slate for election since he would be 
in a permanent minority in the Central Committee and disabled from 
causing a split in the party. He also recommended that Shlyapnikov 
and Kutuzov from the Workers' Opposition become full members (and 
Lutovinov, Medvedev and Kiselev as candidate members); and, from 
the Democratic Centralists, he suggested that Sapronov should be 
given a seat. But Lenin also insisted that the main supporters ofTrotski 
should be removed; Krestinski, Preobrazhenski, Serebryakov and 
I. N. Smimov would be pushed out from the Central Committee and its 
inner subcommittees. 158 Simultaneously there would be promotions for 
his supporters. Lenin must already have had it in mind to give full 
membership in the Politburo to Zinoviev in return for his part in 
Trotski's defeat, and discussions were under way to fill the Secretariat 
with officials who had taken Lenin's line in the winter of 1920-1921.'59 
In addition, Lenin planned to call a meeting of all those who agreed 
with him on the trade unions. Stalin, who had returned to his inner 
counsels, queried whether this would not be interpreted as factional-
ism. Lenin was amused: 'What's this I hear from a died-in-the-wool old 
factionalist?!' 160 He refused to take his position as father of the party 
for granted. As he had done in the years before 1917, he assembled his 
confederates around him and made his dispositions on a factional 
principle. 
THE TENTH PARTY CONGRESS 
The Tenth Party Congress was opened by Lenin in the morning on 8 
March I 92 I. Celebratory speeches were made by representatives of the 
Georgian, Armenian and Azerbaidzhani Communist Parties which had 
recently become the ruling authorities across the Transcaucasus. 161 
 Less Politics! 
177 
717 voting delegates attended. At a time of gathering crisis in Russia 
there was a need to infuse the Congress with optimism; but it was 
equally urgent that delegations should be made aware that their 
experience of particular local problems was shared nationally. No one 
should leave the Congress thinking that the policies of the Civil War 
could be maintained. 
At the evening session Lenin delivered the long-awaited Central 
Committee political report. Unusually he admitted that a mistake had 
been made in 'our advance, our excessively swift advance virtually as 
far as Warsaw'.' 62 Rather than using the royal plural, he was 
shamelessly shifting responsibility to the entire Central Committee. 
He added that the party leadership, in procuring much more grain than 
in the previous year, had been erroneously motivated by a 'desire to 
increase the hand-outs to starving workers'. This was an intriguing 
admission to be made by the architect of the dictatorship of the 
proletariat, and no wonder Pravda's resume of his speech did not 
mention it. 163 Urban working-class consumers, he implied, had been 
treated too generously. The reconquest of Ukraine and Azerbaidzhan 
had made coal and oil available to a government which proceeded to 
distribute it too generously; and a further blunder was committed in 
failing to requisition the grain in the areas where the harvest had been 
most successful: Siberia and the north Caucasus. Instead the state 
authorities had taken stocks from peasants whose 'surpluses were not 
great'. 164 And, to compound things, the demobilisation of 'a peasant 
army' had been undertaken too fast. Thousands of unemployed, 
exhausted conscripts returning to the villages took up 'banditry'. 16s 
Lenin's implicit argument was that the peasantry's capacity to 
destabilise the authorities had been underestimated. The Central 
Committee report was a confession of blunder after blunder. But he 
tied it to an aggressive posture for the future. Lenin declared that the 
factional disagreements in the Bolshevik party were an intellectual 
luxury. Castigating the Workers' Opposition as 'a syndicalist or semi-
anarchist deviation', he asserted that Shlyapnikov's ideas might prove 
menacingly attractive to the peasants. 166 The Kronstadt uprising was a 
case in point. Lenin described it as a 'petit-bourgeois counter-
revolution' more dangerous than the White invasions of Kolchak, 
Denikin and Yudenich. 167 
His plea for unity and orthodoxy was intended to sugar the pill of 
the various unpleasant measures he had yet to defend at Congress. A 
trade agreement with the United Kingdom was a pressing requirement. 
So, too, was the party's acceptance of the desirability of foreign 
 178 
Lenin: A Political Life 
capitalist concessionaires taking a stake in Soviet industry. The leasing 
out of oil wells in Grozny and Baku would secure necessary technology 
and revenues. 168 Even so, general recovery would be a matter 'of many 
years, no less than a decade and- in view of our devastated condition-
probably even more' .169 An economy based on large-scale units of 
production would not quickly be achieved. The state would have to 
deal with small-scale producers, especially in agriculture, for a lengthy 
period. It had been on these grounds that the Central Committee had 
opened debate on the replacement of grain requisitioning with a 
graduated tax in kind. Lenin stressed that such a tax had been 
introduced into law in October 1918, but had proved impractical in the 
Civil War. He also assured his audience that the party leadership had 
not gone soft. 'The peasant,' he stated with a chilling directness that 
was withheld in the subsequent report in Pravda, 'must starve a bit so 
as thereby to relieve the factories and the towns from complete 
starvation'. Inside the four walls of the Congress hall Lenin declared 
that force would be widely used. 170 
Lenin sat down after nearly two hours of oration. Krestinski's 
organisational report on behalf of the Central Committee, which lasted 
over an hour, was bureaucratically perfunctory by comparison. 171 The 
real drama lay with Lenin's strategical change since the previous 
Congress. Solts's report for the Central Control Commission was 
simlarly unexciting. 172 Nobody could overlook the momentousness of 
the occasion. In the words of I. I. Skvortsov-Stepanov, Lenin had set 
the programme for the proceedings. 173 
At the Congress's third session on 9 March the attacks on 'Vladimir 
Ilich' began. Aleksandr Shlyapnikov resented his jibe that the existence 
of the Workers' Opposition had led to the revolts against the 
authorities. Rather the reverse was true according to Shlyapnikov. 
Popular discontent had induced him and his supporters to call for an 
alteration of the party's policies. Lenin's attitude to the Workers' 
Opposition would only cause further disunity. 174 Shlyapnikov's words 
quickly proved prophetic. Osinski, for the Democratic Centralists, 
agreed with Lenin that syndicalism had grown as a force in the 
party. 175 No love was lost between the Workers' Opposition and the 
Democratic Centralists. Nor was Lenin immune from criticism. 
L. S. Sosnovski, a supporter of Trotski in the trade-union contro-
versy, quipped that Lenin had barely mentioned the workers. Unlike 
Trotski, Sosnovski criticised the new grain policy as a 'capitulation 
before the petite bourgeoisie' .176 Back came Yuri Milonov for the 
Workers' Opposition, claiming that Lenin as Sovnarkom chairman 
 Less Politics! 
179 
regarded obstruction of his government's will as being both petit-
bourgeois and harmfu1. 177 Back came D. B. Ryazanov from yet another 
angle. It was his contention that the strict line on the trade unions 
accepted by Lenin at the previous Party Congress was responsible for 
stimulating working-class discontent. 178 Furthermore, a certain Rafail 
denied that the trade-union controversy had been the luxury depicted 
by Lenin. In Moscow, as he pointed out, 'the arch-democrat Stalin' 
had been organising Lenin's faction as if an internal party war were 
being fought. The dispute had by no means been gentlemanly.179 
Krestinski had got ofT lightly. The reason was not that tensions in 
the party had weakened but rather that it was already obvious that 
Trotski had lost the trade-union discussion. Lenin was the undoubted 
party leader and was held responsible for all existing trends. When the 
time arrived for Lenin to respond to his critics, he was ill-disposed to 
compromise. Picking up Shlyapnikov's enquiry as to why People's 
Commissar Tsyurupa had not been arrested for his recent decisions, he 
feigned horrified astonishment (as if Lenin had not similarly called 
rhetorically for the incarceration of close colleagues). 180 That evening, 
at session four, Lenin's report was approved by 514 votes against 47 for 
the Democratic Centralists and 45 for the Workers' Opposition. 181 
A vibrant debate on agitation and propaganda ensued, introduced 
by Evgeni Preobrazhenski (who, like Krestinski, was a supporter of 
Trotski). Lenin did not participate; indeed he did not re-appear at the 
speaker's lectern until three days later. 182 He had made his plans on 
politics and economics clear. He had attracted some criticism, but not 
as much as might have been expected. Until the debate on the trade 
unions he would retire from the fray. Apart from anything else, there 
was the response to the Kronstadt revolt to organise, and he needed to 
confer amicably with Trotski (who was about to return from an 
emergency investigative trip to Petrograd). 183 Perhaps he also worried 
lest the the coalition of the Platform of Ten should fall apart. No topic 
was more likely to bring this about than the 'national question', which 
was the very next item on the Congress agenda. The official report was 
delivered by Stalin. With the recent conquest of the Transcaucasus in 
everyone's mind, Stalin stressed the party's objective of equal rights for 
all nationalities; and he expatiated a bit on the tendency of several 
Russian Bolsheviks to indulge in 'Russian Great-Power chauvinism'. 
Stalin took the chance to reply to a scathing article about him by 
Georgi Chicherin in Pravda. His tone was angry. Among Chicherin's 
mistakes was a favouring of the slogan of national self-determination! 
Stalin noted that, as a result of discussions at the Eighth Party 
 180 
Lenin: A Political Life 
Congress, the slogan no longer figured in the party programme. He 
affirmed, moreover, that the right of secession had been retained in the 
programme.184 
This last point was tosh. The programme referred to secession only 
indirectly, and Stalin and his friends had been among those who had 
seen to it in 1919 that no unambiguous statement had been made. 185 
Furthermore, Lenin in 1921 would indubitably have been annoyed by 
Stalin's dismissiveness about national self-determination. The slogan 
remained dear to Lenin. 186 Not that Stalin was criticised by Georgi 
Safarov, who gave an opposing report, for illiberalism. Instead 
Safarov, like most speakers, was scathing about Stalin's avoidance of 
practical detai1. 187 Some speakers from 'the borderlands' went further 
than this. V. P. Zatonski from the Ukraine argued against the creeping 
Great Russian chauvinism and stated that Stalin seemed to deny that 
any republics independent from Moscow were conceivable. He also 
confessed that he himself, a Bolshevik leader, failed to understand the 
precise nature of the treaty between Soviet Russia and Soviet 
Ukraine. 188 Anastas Mikoyan and Mikola Skrypnik, too, complained 
about Stalin's vagueness. 189 
Lenin might well have joined Stalin's critics- and this omission was 
to make his dissatisfaction with Stalin all the more abrupt and 
tumultuous in the following year. 190 Stalin for his own part perceived 
that greatest unease abided among yet other delegates that too many 
concessions were being made to the non-Russian nationalities; and, by 
repudiating the charge that he was 'artificially implanting' national 
consciousness in areas where it previously barely existed, he also eluded 
a confrontation with the delegates from the borderlands. He thereby 
gave the impression of being closer in thinking to Lenin than was 
strictly true. 191 Furthermore, a ruling from the chair cut short the 
discussion and a drafting commission was formed. 192 The next debate, 
initiated on party structure in the sixth session on 11 March by Nikolai 
Bukharin, was equally contentious. Still Lenin kept himself out of the 
way. Criticisms were made almost identical to those offered at the 
Party Conference in September. Democratic Centralists and Workers' 
Opposition were to the fore; but this time they were opposed by several 
delegates who suggested that the central party leadership had been 
altogether too indulgent to them. 193 Yet even the Party Congress could 
not isolate itself from external events. All minds were focussed upon 
Kronstadt. The formal agenda of the Congress was suspended in the 
next three sessions, and it is claimed that no verbatim record was kept. 
Lenin played his part again. Measures were formulated with his 
assistance to ensure the military and the political reliability of Red 
 Less Politics! 
181 
Army units. Dzierzynski provided information from the files of the 
Cheka. 194 Up to 140 Congress delegates volunteered to stiffen the army 
units sent across the frozen waters separating Petrograd from the island 
of Kronstadt; and, on Dzierzynski's suggestion, delegates from Samara 
and Saratov provinces were instructed to go back and deal with their 
rebellious peasants. 195 
Nothing was left to chance, and Lenin on the same day as the last of 
the emergency sessions penned drafts of his two motions on the 
syndicalist deviation and on party unity. 196 In the first motion, the 
Workers' Opposition was condemned for is allegedly anti-Marxist 
ideas; in the second, factional activity in general was banned on pain of 
expulsion from the Central Committee for any faction's leader (and 
from the party for the faction as a whole). This assault, even if not 
previously planned in detail, was made almost inevitable by the 
difficulties posed in Kronstadt and the Volga region. After this 
intervention, the debate on party structure was resumed. Bukharin was 
ridiculed for knowing little about his subject.197 Yet Kronstadt had 
shaken everyone. Even the Workers' Opposition, as Aleksandra 
Kollontai stressed, supported the bloody suppression of the rebellious 
sailors and had sent its volunteers. 198 There was an overwhelming vote 
for Bukharin's theses: 369 against merely 23 for the Workers' 
Opposition and nine for the Democratic Centralists.199 
At session twelve, on 14 March, Zinoviev opened the debate on the 
subject which had engaged party leaders in previous months: the trade 
unions. Nothing new was said. Trotski, who had by then got back from 
Petrograd, followed him. He emphasised that in February 1920, so far 
from being unorthodox as a Bolshevik, he had put forward a version of 
economic reform not totally dissimilar from the current proposal to 
abolish grain requisitioning; he revealed also that Lenin at the time had 
accused him of 'Free Trade-ism'.200 But Trotski did little to promote 
his case on the unions beyond asserting that the Central Committee's 
motion was so lacking in fluency that Lenin could not have scrutinised 
it closely.201 The debate had had its sting half-drawn by the situation 
outside the Congress. The Workers' Opposition and the Democratic 
Centralists had their say, but briefly. Lenin was not pressed unduly 
hard when he spoke on Zinoviev's behalf (although he did not desist 
from charging Trotski with having broken Central Committee 
discipline with his unleashing of the trade-union controversy).202 
Trotski retorted very reasonably that he had infringed no disciplinary 
code; he quoted, too, Lenin's statement at the Ninth Party Congress 
against the 'rubbish' spoken on behalf of democratic practices in the 
trade unions.203 It was a nice historical point that did him no good. As 
 182 
Lenin: A Political Life 
he went down to the expected defeat, he lamely declared that the trade-
union resolution would not survive in effect through to the Eleventh 
Party Congress. Zinoviev, naturally, disputed this hotly; and the 
Congress voted a trouncing victory to the Platform of Ten.204 
Yet another closed session was held that evening, devoted to 
deliberations on elections to the Central Committee. The results were 
announced the following morning at session fourteen. 479 delegates 
voted. All 479 votes were cast to confirm Lenin's membership. Out of 
the other Politburo members, Stalin came sixth in the Central 
Committee list, Trotski a humiliating tenth and Zinoviev - who had 
been the peripatetic champion of Lenin's line on the trade unions in the 
winter - an even more distressing eighteenth.2°5 Lenin had not been 
guiltless of polemical distortion in the trade-union controversy; but he 
had genuinely tried to stop its happening in the first place. His 
unanimous election to the Central Committee was his reward. 
Only then did Lenin step forward with the Central Committee report 
on the end to grain requisitioning. He affirmed the question to be 
'primarily political'. In a phrase which was becoming conventional, 
Lenin suggested that the nub of the matter was 'the relation of the 
working class to the peasantry'.206 At present the peasants were 
discontented, and Lenin added: 'Classes cannot be tricked.' The 'final 
success' of socialist revolution in the Soviet republic still depended on 
the timely outbreak of revolutions 'in one or several advanced 
countries'; but a second and equally important prerequisite was the 
creation of an 'agreement' between the proletariat and the mass of the 
peasantry.2°7 This was mealy-mouthed rhetoric evading any mention of 
one-party dictatorship. Yet it was also a forceful assertion, before an 
audience not known for its friendliness to the peasants, that policies 
had to be changed drastically. He dropped all pretence: 'What is 
freedom of circulation? Freedom of circulation is freedom of trade, and 
freedom of trade means a return to capitalism.' But immediately he 
added the reassurance: 'We can permit free local circulation to a decent 
extent without destroying but in fact strengthening the political power 
of the proletariat.'208 Any communist who thought the country's 
economic base to be reconstructible within three years was fantasising. 
Existing collective farms were examples of how not to run an 
economy.209 It had to be recognised that the proposed reform of 
policy would strengthen the emergence of 'kulakdom'. But needs 
must!210 Lenin asked the Congress, which by then was eating calmly 
out of his hand, to refrain from discussing details. It should instead, he 
urged, take a decision in principle and in favour. 211 
 Less Politics! 
183 
Tsyurupa, still unconvinced but resigned to Lenin's victory, offered a 
co-report. His gripes were that the new as well as the old policy 
depended on the same method of calculation and collection of tax even 
if the targets were set lower; and that the government lacked accurate 
statistical information on which to base any targets whatever.212 
Tsyurupa objected mainly to the private trading and to the 
encouragement of rural co-ops. 213 He also implicitly challenged 
Lenin's assumption that the new policy would somehow be more 
orderly in implementation. War communism in its technocratic 
manifestation spoke with the voice of Tsyurupa.214 
Two speakers followed in Lenin's support, including Evgeni 
Preobrazhenski: the Bolshevik Left contained many who saw that 
some reform was urgently necessary. But then M. I. Frumkin, who 
worked under Tsyurupa in the People's Commissariat of Food 
Supplies, argued that Lenin's proposal would condemn workers to 
death by starvation. He castigated private trade, and reminded the 
Congress that the attempt to apply a tax-in-kind in 1918 had failed. 215 
Lenin's summary speech at the end was characteristically combative. 
He acknowledged that a danger existed from 'petit-bourgeois' 
agricultural and indeed industrial producers if his policy were to be 
accepted. In one of his boldest strokes, he replied that large-scale 
industry would be reconstructed largely through injections of foreign 
capital. Lenin, the denouncer of global capitalist imperialism, even 
contended that the policy on concessionnaires was an attempt to form 
'a bloc with the capitalism of the advanced countries'.216 Undoubtedly, 
in the light of the hostility shown to his policy in subsequent months, 
he was to regret this improvised remark. It was tantamount to stating 
that the October Revolution should search fondly for fraternal 
capitalist regimes. This would have made a nonsense of Bolshevism. 
He proceeded successfully to the final vote. His motion was accepted. 
And yet he may have been disappointed. The number of delegates who 
supported him against Frumkin was not recorded.217 Furthermore, 
D. Z. Manuilski declared that the Ukrainian delegation offered only 
very conditional support for the resolution. It would strike a blow at 
the committees of the village poor in Ukraine. Manuilski demanded 
that Lenin's policy should be accepted only with the proviso that it 
could be substantially modified in response to local conditions.218 
Lenin had handled the Congress superbly. He had shown initial 
aggression; he had then lain low while his adjutants moved among the 
delegates and the import of his programme was considered. He had 
made an appeal for unity in the face of a tremendous economic and 
 184 
Lenin: A Political Life 
political crisis; and he had slipped his proposal to terminate grain 
requisitioning to the end of an overloaded agenda. No one else could 
have done this. Kamenev would have been booed off the platform. 
Trotski had covered himself with too much controversy. Lenin was 
vital to the re-orientation of policies. And he handled his role with the 
aplomb of a man who knew his position in the party to be stronger 
than anyone else's. 
At session fifteen the same evening it was Kamenev's tum to report 
on 'capitalist encirclement'. His points were succinctly made. A further 
world war could be expected. The principal belligerents, he wildly 
predicted, would probably be 'England and America'. Only an uprising 
of the proletariat in those countries could prevent such a war.219 
Kamenev forbore to pick up Lenin's impromptu call for a 'bloc with 
the capitalism of advanced countries'. But the necessity for manoeuvres 
in foreign policy was stressed. Pursuit of a trade agreement had to be 
resumed. It was Kamenev's contention that, with Russia's re-entry into 
the world economic system, capitalism's own post-war recovery would 
be prevented.220 And yet even he, the leading figure on the Bolshevik 
Right, took a stern view. He called for rapid re-arming for the future 
defeat of 'countries which are economically much richer'.221 Such a 
statement allowed him to return to a stirring defence of the central 
party leadership's decision to make Baku in Azerbaidzhan into the first 
centre for oil concessionaires.222 He was harassed by Anastas 
Mikoyan, who was equally keen to continue his criticism of Stalin 
when the draft resolution of the commission on the national question 
was presented at the end of the session. The commission had 
incorporated a little more detail, but substantially Stalin's original 
report was retained. Mikoyan was voted down.223 
Most of the main decisions had been taken before the last session on 
16 March. Zinoviev's report on the Communist International was 
typically triumphalist. Then, in the closing minutes, Lenin quickly 
introduced the two debates on party unity and the anarcho-syndicalist 
deviation. Not an inch to the Workers' Opposition was given by 
him.224 Karl Radek had a presentiment of the threshold being crossed 
in the history of the party: 'I have the feeling that there was perhaps 
being established here a rule which can be turned against anyone as yet 
unknown.'225 Even Radek, in his light-hearted fashion, recommended 
acceptance of Lenin's motions. Both were passed by overwhelming 
votes.226 The Central Committee's other reports and proposals were 
swiftly given similar treatment. Kamenev declared the Congress at an 
end and the delegates sang the Internationa/e.l27 
