 10 Deaths and Entrances 
PROBLEMS OF LENINISM 
Hypothetical questions proliferate about all great historical perso-
nages. What religion would have dominated Europe if Saul, the son of 
a tent-maker, had not taken the road to Damascus? Or what would 
have become of Christanity if Charles Martel had not defeated the 
previously invincible Moors at Poitiers? Would a Second World War 
have been prevented if Adolf Hitler had been assassinated? A question 
of the same order arises in connection with Lenin: would the history of 
the USSR have been greatly different if premature illness had not 
ended his life? 
It is necessary to pause before proceeding to the dramatic last 
months of Lenin's career in order to take stock of the issues. Iosif 
Stalin remained keen to present himself as a devoted and consistent 
Leninist who secured continuity after Lenin's death. 1 This led him to 
throw a blanket over the disagreements between them in the winter of 
1922-1923. Lenin had objected to several of Stalin's policies, and 
demonstrably perceived these disagreements as constituting a basic 
divergence over strategy. Generations of Stalin's enemies took this as 
proof positive that he indeed betrayed true Leninism. But Lenin's 
judgement is not reliable. It was a feature of his career that he inflated 
matters of secondary or third-rate importance, consciously or 
otherwise, into objects of life-and-death political struggle. There is no 
denying that the multifaceted dispute of 1922-1923 was highly 
significant; but it did not affect the fundaments of the regime's 
principles. These did not figure in the communications between Lenin 
and Stalin for the simple reason that they belonged to the zone of their 
shared and deeply-felt assumptions. Without using the terminology, 
both leaders enthused about dictatorship, the one-party-state, violence 
in pursuit of political goals, massive state economic direction, cultural 
persecution, militant atheism, ideological monopoly, forcible main-
tenance of a multinational state. The list, while not being endless, 
involved inclinations and aspirations that made blood brothers out of 
the Kremlin's premier and the party's General Secretary. Nothing said 
or done by the dying Lenin suggested that he had changed his mind on 
such fundamental essentials of post-October Leninism.2 
291 
 292 
Lenin: A Political Life 
The fact remains that the USSR suffered unbridled mass terror in the 
I 930s. The party leaders, with few exceptions, were exterminated. 
Stalin and his cronies liquidated their rivals and organised a bloodbath 
which drowned millions before it was blocked up. There is little doubt 
that the vengeful, unhinged character of Stalin was crucial to this 
murderous episode. Lenin had a stature among his colleagues and a 
personal equilibrium that rendered him unlikely to espouse such 
ghastliness. We cannot be sure; but it is also improbable that the War 
Communist methods used in the late I 920s to pulverise the peasantry 
into submission and undertake the collectivisation of agriculture by 
main force would have occurred to Lenin as a desirable project. But 
these were excesses of Leninism, albeit excesses unimagined in their 
proportions and distortions by Lenin, which were practised by Stalin. 
And yet, just as the gap between him and Stalin over policies should 
not be exaggerated, so we must query the supposition that the thought 
of Lenin underwent massive alteration in the last two or three years of 
his life. Modifications occurred, large and distinct modifications, but 
they were not significant enough to merit the conclusion that he had 
changed the rudiments of his thought. Nobody proclaimed Lenin's 
constancy more loudly than that other great claimant to his mantle: 
Lev Trotski. Through the 1920s and 1930s Trotski denied that Lenin 
had changed his mind at the end; and he added always that Stalin 
emasculated the basic orientation of Lenin's thought. In this he had to 
ignore the commonalty of Lenin's and Stalin's ideas in several basic 
respects. He also tried to indicate that, had he lived, Lenin would have 
espoused policies identical with Trotski's.3 There was in fact more in 
common between Trotski and Lenin. They had a subtler view on the 
modes and substance of revolutionary strategy than the crude Stalin. 
Bolsheviks, they implied, had to be sophisticated dictators. Even they 
still had their differences: Lenin was reluctant to move as quickly as 
was wanted by Trotski towards a tight system of state economic 
planning; and Trotski almost certainly was more committed than Lenin 
to risks in foreign policy if only the cause of a German socialist 
revolution might be advanced. But that Trotski, no less than Lenin and 
Stalin, adhered to a common basic set of assumptions is undeniable. 
This is true also of Nikolai Bukharin. The story is well-known about 
Lenin's affection for the man, and Bukharin was to suggest that it was 
his own strategical ideas as published in the mid-1920s that reflected 
Lenin's deathbed cogitations and aspirations. Neither Trotski nor 
Stalin, then, but Bukharinl With Trotski there is the evidence of the 
letters seeking a coalition in December 1922; with Stalin there are all 
 Deaths and Entrances 
293 
the instances of mutual hostility between him and Lenin in the same 
month. With Bukharin the sources are more partial: they are reducible 
mainly to Bukharin's remembrances about what was said to him by 
Lenin in the fateful winter of 1922-1923. 
Bukharin was to assert that, as they talked in the beautiful gardens 
and woods at Gorki, Lenin confided a novel idea of the possibilities of 
a 'transition to socialism'. According to Bukharin, this included an 
emphasis on evolutionary, peaceful means for achieving socialist 
objectives.4 Lenin purportedly had come to believe that the local 
peasant community could be persuaded eventually to tum itself into a 
collective farm and that this transformation, be it accomplished only at 
a snail's pace, would be the decisive factor in the party's revolutionary 
strategy. Bukharin was destined to fall out politically with Stalin in the 
late 1920s when Stalin began to oppose the New Economic Policy; and 
Bukharin naturally did not fail to suggest that Bukharin and Lenin had 
been at one in contending that a complete absence of force was both 
desirable and possible. Thus it is proposed that Bukharinism was 
simply the latest version of Leninism approved by Lenin in his own 
lifetime. And yet Lenin's plans for the New Economic Policy do not 
sustain the notion that he had switched to a fully evolutionary 
prognosis. Quite the contrary: his writings in 1922 include demands for 
increased state economic intervention and for increased cultural and 
religious repression; and at no point did he relent his suppression of 
other political parties. The beatification of Lenin as the putative 
creator of communism with a human face is moonshine: Lenin lived 
and died a Leninist. 
Not that Bukharin did not have his points of accord with Lenin in 
this period. He supported Lenin's line on the national question; but he 
was also opposed to Lenin in the foreign-trade dispute and had been 
complicit in the deception of Lenin when Mariya Volodicheva handed 
Lenin's dictated notes to Stalin. Bukharin was his own man, and 
differed from Lenin on other basic questions of policy. He retained a 
commitment to Bogdanov's call for a 'proletarian culture'. While 
Lenin's emphasis lay upon the introduction of literacy and account-
keeping, Bukharin looked forward to workers developing their own 
cultural practices and institutions to replace 'bourgeois' dominion in 
social thought.5 Nor must it be accepted that Bukharin himself was a 
saintly humanitarian. He did not aim to repeal the party's monopoly of 
power or the instrumentalities of repression.6 
Bolshevik leaders shared in politics more than they individually held 
apart. Their disagreements lay within the definable range of Bolshevik 
 294 
Lenin: A Political Life 
ideas. Elastic as it was, Bolshevism was not infinitely stretchable; and 
its political assumptions, after the experience of the October 
Revolution and the Civil War, no longer had the capacity to reach 
the nearest points of Western social-democracy. The party leadership 
had brought this about. Even the 'soft' leaders had hardened their 
attitude since 1917. It is not inconceivable that Bolshevik policies might 
have been diverted on to a more peaceful, evolutionary path if the 
party had been less centralised, if ordinary party members had had a 
greater impact and if the brutalisation of politics in Russia had not 
gone to extraordinary lengths in the years immediately after the seizure 
of power in Petrograd. Yet these possibilities were not realised. So that, 
whatever compromises Lenin might have made if he had lived longer, 
the regime would have remained a dictatorship with massive state 
intervention in economic and social affairs. In addition, Lenin was an 
impulsive creature. To be sure, he had confided in his own notebooks 
in November 1922 that he expected the revolutionary advance of the 
second half-decade of Soviet power to be 'slower' than in the first half-
decade.' His concern about the peasantry's well-being, moreover, was 
accompanied by continued public assertions that peasant influence 
over governmental measures should be strictly limited. But privately he 
put it more starkly; for Lenin, the question was: 'Who leads? The 
peasantry (bourgeoisie) or the proletariat?'8 Lenin the class warrior was 
not politically defunct. There was no guarantee that the itch to take on 
the peasantry, when fears about its rising affluence and influence arose 
in the mid-1920s, would not have driven him to desperate measures. 
FLIES IN THE MILK 
Lenin had resumed the secretarial sessions, this time with Lidiya 
Fotieva on 26 December 1922. He argued that the new working-class 
members of the Central Committee, after its proposed increase in size, 
would acquire an administrative training of benefit to the entire Soviet 
state. The personnel and institutions of this state, he repeated, 
constituted a problem inasmuch as they had largely been inherited 
'from the tsar and from the bourgeoisie'. The Workers' and Peasants' 
Inspectorate had not satisfactorily discharged the task of supervising 
and controlling its operations, and Lenin emphasised that the 
introduction of workers to the Central Committee would improve 
 Deaths and Entrances 
295 
the situation.9 This argument, flimsy as it was, posed yet another threat 
to Stalin's position since he was the Inspectorate's chairman. Trotski 
had persistently derided the Inspectorate. 10 Lenin's similar criticism 
indicated that Trotski and he were drawing together. This impression 
was reinforced on 27 December when Mariya Volodicheva took over 
as short-hand copyist from her colleague Fotieva. Lenin declared a 
change of mind on the State Planning Commission, pronouncing in 
favour of expanding its areas of competence. He did not wish these to 
include legislative authority, but he came closer to Trotski by 
suggesting that the State Planning Commission should make submis-
sions to soviet legislative organs. 11 Lenin specifically defended the two 
current leaders of the State Planning Commission, G. M. Krzhizha-
novski and Y. L. Pyatakov, against attacks on them; he liked the 
balance between the cautious Krzhizhanovski and the assertive 
Pyatakov. Next day, when Fotieva resumed secretarial repsonsibil-
ities, he explained that their joint appointment was a means of avoiding 
the administrative peremptoriness which he had levelled against 
Pyatakov earlier in his notes. 12 
The State Planning Commission remained on his mind on 29 
December, as Volodicheva made notes for him. He demanded that the 
Commission's communist functionaries should check on the loyalty of 
the 'bourgeois' experts. 13 Repetitiousness was affecting his day-to-day 
commentary. He also returned fitfully to the question of increasing the 
Central Committee's size and proposed that the new working-class 
members should have 400 to 500 members of the Workers' and 
Peasants' Inspectorate at their disposal so as to supervise the state 
administration in genera1. 14 Lenin's wording had a rambling quality: he 
did not explain how Central Committee members laden with these 
extraordinary duties would simultaneously discharge the task of 
keeping the Politburo and Orgburo leaders from each other's 
throats. The 'Letter to the Congress' lacked analytical thoroughness. 
Yet his mental powers had not entirely left him. On 30 December he 
had recorded, by dictation, his feelings of guilt about the Georgian 
affair and the new federal constitution.'5 He doubted that the single 
state apparatus linking and dominating all existing republics, as set out 
in the Central Committee draft presented to the Congress of Soviets, 
would differ substantially from the old Russian Imperial apparatus. 
Lenin argued that 'the infinitesimal percentage of soviet and sovietised 
workers would drown in that sea of chauvinistic Great Russian rubbish 
like a fly in some milk'; and he momentarily queried the immediate 
desirability of forming the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics: 'There 
 296 
Lenin: A Political Life 
is no doubt that it would be appropriate to delay with this measure 
until such time as we can swear by this apparatus as being truly our 
own.' 16 He even complained that, in the light of incidents such as 
Ordzhonikidze's physical assault on Kobachidze, the right of secession 
would remain 'an empty piece of paper'. 17 The non-Russians needed 
protection against Russian thuggery, and Lenin picked out Stalin's 
'hastiness and administrative pre-occupation' for censure. 18 The 
General Secretary's cunning in sending a non-Russian, Dzierzynski, 
to investigate the Georgian Bolshevik Central Committee's grievances 
did not escape his notice. According to Lenin, the Pole had displayed 'a 
truly Russian attitude'. Dzierzynski's self-identification with the 
Russian cause was allegedly typical over-reaction by a non-Russian 
official who sided with Moscow. 19 
On New Year's Eve Lenin summarised his position by saying that 
genuine internationalism involves the largest nation behaving with 
scrupulous sensitivity towards the smaller nations within the same 
state. He recalled the nasty epithets used by Russians about Tartars, 
Ukrainians and Poles in the days of his Volga childhood. A Georgian 
acting oppressively in relation to Georgia was objectively 'a crude 
Great Russian thug'. Failure to handle the national question carefully 
inflamed passions , diverted political attention and damaged 'the basic 
interest of proletarian solidarity'.20 
His recommendations meandered somewhat. His first was highly 
general: Lenin emphasised a commitment to 'retaining and reinforcing 
the union of socialist republics'. He sensed that his words might 
otherwise be interpreted out of context by non-Russian nationalists. 
Lenin had also asserted that only the People's Commissariat of 
External Affairs was reliably devoid of influential figures from the old 
regime; and yet he failed to prescribe a remedy. Possibly he was already 
agitated by yet another matter: namely what to do about the 
persecutors of the Georgian Bolshevik leadership. He demanded the 
exemplary punishment of Ordzhonikidze, the reconsideration of the 
materials in the Dzierzynski report and the holding of Stalin and 
Dzierzynski as 'politically responsible for this entire truly Great 
Russian nationalistic campaign'.21 Stalin had already been singled out 
for concern in the earliest sections of the 'Letter to the Congress', but 
the nature of the menace to him remained unclear. For Lenin briskly 
moved on to a last recommendation. This was that Bolsheviks, while 
keeping the USSR in existence, should accept that the plans for 
constitutional integration might have to be dropped. Only the People's 
Commissariats of External Affairs and of Military Affairs should 
 Deaths and Entrances 
297 
immediately be unified in Moscow; the other governmental institutions 
should fall under the authority of the various 'independent' republics.22 
This was in direct contrast with the decisions taken at the All-Union 
Congress of Soviets. He was at pains to affirm that he did not 
contemplate the USSR's disintegration. He mentioned that the 
Bolshevik-led republics would stay under general party discipline, 
and that any breakdown in co-ordination 'between Moscow and the 
other centres can be paralysed by party authority'. 23 
This was proof that, despite his renewed talk about the right of 
secession, he had no intention of honouring it. Even so, he wanted to 
avoid openly offending the non-Russians and to promote the example 
of inter-ethnic co-operation as a beacon of hope to 'the hundreds of 
millions amongst the peoples of the East'. He reposed faith in the anti-
imperial movements in China and India, stressing their crucial role in 
the downfall of global capitalist imperialism.24 Lenin's passion was 
distinct in every line, and this final political campaign was being 
mounted by a very determined 'Old Man'. 
In the following days he dictated a number of Pravda articles on 
several subjects. These were published either straightaway or within a 
few months.25 It was the national question and the position of Stalin 
which most perturbed him. 26 His family and medical staff observed 
how the two topics gnawed at him until, on 4 January 1923, he made 
up his mind. Lenin called in Lidiya Fotieva and asked her to retrieve 
from the safe the notes he had dictated about his leading colleagues on 
23 and 24 December. She listened in awe as he added a codicil: 'Stalin is 
too crude, and this inadequacy, which is wholly acceptable in our 
milieu and in exchanges among us communists, becomes intolerable in 
the post of General Secretary. I therefore urge comrades to think of a 
method for transferring Stalin from this position and to appoint 
another person to this position who in all other respects differs from 
comrade Stalin through the one advantage [i.e. over Stalin: RS] of 
being more tolerant, more loyal, more polite and more attentive to 
comrades, less capricious and so on.'27 Fotieva dutifully inscribed these 
sentences in her notebook and, unlike her friend Volodicheva, chose to 
leave them in their original disjointed language. Lenin guessed that he 
might not have put a fully cogent case, and added: 'This circumstance 
may appear an irrelevant triviality. But I think that from the viewpoint 
of preventing a split and from the viewpoint, as previously described by 
me, of the interrelationship of Stalin and Trotski, it is not a triviality-
or else it's a triviality which is capable of acquiring decisive 
significance. '28 
 298 
Lenin: A Political Life 
LAST ARTICLES 
Precisely how Lenin would try to deal with Stalin was not intimated. 29 
That he wanted him removed from the Secretariat is evident; but 
beyond that nothing is clear. There is no suggestion that Stalin's 
political career would be completely finished if Lenin were to get his 
way; it is not certain that his removal from the Central Committee was 
Lenin's objective (and indeed, after the fracas with Tomski in 1921, 
Lenin knew what limits existed to his own authority).30 All that is 
certain is that Lenin wanted to prevent Stalin from realising his 
potential to become the dominant Bolshevik leader; it is not even clear 
that Stalin in Lenin's intention would be excluded from the Central 
Committee. 
With remarkable tenacity the sick Lenin meanwhile produced 
articles in abundance for Pravda. It cannot be demonstrated that 
Fotieva conveyed the latest pieces from his 'Letter to the Congress' to 
Stalin; it is also conceivable that Stalin did not importune her for 
further reports on the direction of Lenin's thought: both of these are 
possibilities.31 But Stalin's agility in protecting himself makes them not 
entirely plausible. In any case Stalin must have gauged the hostility of 
Lenin towards him from the first section of the 'Letter' as revealed to 
him by Volodicheva, and the contents of the Pravda articles can have 
left no doubt in Stalin's mind. The first article, written on 2 January 
and published two days later, was fairly innocuous. It centred on a 
1920 survey of literacy in Russia. The fact that less than a third of the 
adult population were classifiable as literate induced him to scoff at all 
the proposals for a specifically proletarian culture. The fundamentals 
of 'bourgeois culture', Lenin declared, had yet to be established (and 
here he was implicitly criticising not Stalin but Bukharin). The cultural 
imperatives of the party were enormous.32 The budget of the People's 
Commissariat of Enlightenment ought therefore to be iron-clad. Lenin, 
under his wife's influence, acknowledged that 'a new posing of 
questions of pedagogy' was desirable; but apparently this would 
mainly involve a reconsideration of the treatment of religion in the 
schools; and he urged that propagandists should emphasise the 
allegation that Jesus Christ had never lived. The political under-
pinnings of tuition were important. The emphasis was laid by him both 
upon the right of the state to prescribe the contents of all education and 
upon its obligation to regard the raising of the technical accomplish-
ments of society as its cultural priority.33 
 Deaths and Entrances 
299 
Nothing in these considerations was at variance with Lenin's previous 
writings. The notion that he came over, in his last months, to a different 
standpoint on culture has no scrap of justification. No hint that he 
wanted to revoke the policy of sending artists and philosophers into 
emigration, no hint of relenting in his militant atheism, no hint of 
support for opening Bolshevism to a polyphony of cultural voices. As 
earlier, he wanted literacy, punctiliousness, account-keeping. 
Nor was there much new in his article 'On Co-operation', which was 
dictated and written up between 4 and 6 January 1923. Not enough 
attention, he stated, was being paid to co-operatives.34 He had long 
since abandoned his own opposition, before 1917, to the co-operative 
movement on the grounds that it served capitalist interests. The 
difference now, he declared, was that the state was not bourgeois but 
socialist. He stood by his contention that the establishment of co-
operatives would not be equivalent to 'the construction of a socialist 
society'.35 He picked up again the question of culture. Compulsory 
universal participation, on an active basis, would make the population 
'civilised' .36 Inverted commas embraced the adjective: Lenin sensed that 
its usage bore a resemblance to the kind of remark made by Victorian 
capitalist philanthropists. But he brought his own touch to the theme 
by insisting that participation should be ubiquitously implemented 
with sanctions of state coercion. He reckoned it might take a decade or 
two before success was achieved. At the moment, according to Lenin, 
the trading methods of the peasant were 'Asiatic' and 'non-European' 
and the peasantry was 'uncultured'. The aim should be a society of 
'civilised co-operative members'. 37 The seizure and securing of political 
power were essential to socialist strategy, and nineteenth-century 
advocates of co-operatives such as the Welshman Robert Owen were 
utopian in not recognising this. But cultural development, insofar as 
international political and military factors allowed, should now 
become the 'centre of gravity' of the party's activity.38 
Not a word signified a change of heart on dictatorship, terror or 
repression of free artistic thought. Lenin's article called only for a shift 
in the emphasis of policies; it did not include a recognition that it had 
been wrong to make the October Revolution 'in an inadequately 
cultured country'.39 This idea was resumed in his review of Nikolai 
Sukhanov's multi-volume history of the two Revolutions of 1917. 
Sukhanov was a left-wing Menshevik. His history was a brilliant 
eyewitness account and was enhanced by the author's acquaintance 
with a wide circle of leaders in all the political parties. After all, his wife 
 300 
Lenin: A Political Life 
Galina had put their flat at the disposal of the Bolshevik Central 
Committee on 10 October 1917 when the decision to seize power had 
been taken.40 Menshevism had traditionally adhered to the principle 
that, until capitalism had reached economic and cultural maturity in a 
given country, it would be dangerous and futile to inaugurate 'the 
transition to communism'; and this continued to be Sukhanov's 
objection to Bolshevik strategy. 
Lenin postulated that Sukhanov displayed 'the pedantry of all our 
petit-bourgeois democrats'. His major point was that Marxism 
demanded eternal 'flexibility' .41 This meant that the peculiarities of 
Russia, situated between East and West and between advanced 
industrialism and the pre-industrial condition, had to be taken into 
account. There were bound to be 'several partial novelties' in the 
establishment of socialism under the Bolsheviks. The notion that a 
general pattern existed to be followed by each country was ludicrous. 
Lenin freely conceded that, in Marxist terminology, the level of 
'development of the productive forces' was too low for the immediate 
inception of socialism in Russia.42 But he appended a question: 'If the 
creation of socialism demands a definite level of culture (although 
nobody can say precisely what is constituted by this definite "level of 
culture" since it is different in each of the West European states), why 
can't we make our beginning by using revolutionary means for the 
conquest of the prerequisites for this definite level and only 
subsequently, on the basis of worker-and-peasant power and the 
soviet order, move onwards to catch up other peoples.'43 No question 
mark appeared at the end of the sentence, indicating that Lenin 
assumed that its contents were sufficiently self-evident to provoke no 
contradiction. Even so, he had never previously framed his arguments 
in this way. Before 1917 he, too, had assumed that socialism could not 
be introduced before social and cultural prerequisites were satisfied; 
and between the February and October Revolutions he had avoided 
the topic. What his article 'On Our Revolution' did was to give a 
retrospective legitimation to his strategy of October 1917.44 
Napoleon Bonaparte's dictum was recalled by Lenin: 'On s'engage et 
puis ..... on voit.' The textbooks, he suggested, could be thrown away. 
Kautsky's work had been useful in its time; but it did not prescribe 
strategy for all places and all times.45 He had spoken like this in the 
heat of the October Revolution, but it was unusual for him to invoke 
the authority of a figure such as Napoleon who did not stand in the 
socialist pantheon: his self-revelation as a political gambler and 
improviser was unprecedentedly frank. 46 
 Deaths and Entrances 
301 
Without directly saying so, he stressed the importance of luck and 
contingency in giving the Bolsheviks their chance. It had been the 'first 
imperialist war' which had brought about 'the complete inescapability 
of the condition' of the workers and peasants and had pushed them 
towards taking 'any chances' of a solution through a socialist seizure of 
power.'" But Lenin felt fully confident intellectually only when his 
opinions were supportable by classic Marxist texts; and his usual 
method was to dredge up references to Marx and Engels or to his own 
earlier work. But his current emphasis on cultural backwardness, 
international political vulnerability and the Russian peasantry made it 
inappropriate to rehearse the citations in The State and Revolution.48 
Instead Lenin adduced Marx's hope (as expressed in a letter of 1856) 
that a dual revolt of workers and peasants might overthrow German 
capitalism.49 The Bolsheviks in Lenin's view followed this tradition. To 
his dying breath, he avoided recourse to Marx's favourable comments 
on the Russian populists, who wanted to base a socialist society upon 
what they took to be the egalitarian practices and potential of the 
peasant village commune; he opposed agrarian socialism: his Marxism 
continued to hymn the virtues of workers, towns and large-scale 
organisation. Lenin remained true to himself to the end, and the 
equivocations of Marx himself in the last years of his life were 
ignored. 50 
'On Co-operation' and 'On Our Revolution' were not published in 
Pravda until May 1923. But another article, 'How We Should 
Reorganise Rabkrin', was quickly put into the press despite touching 
Stalin's vital interests. The Workers' and Peasants' Inspectorate, still 
had him as its People's Commissar; and Lenin had complained about 
its efficiency. Now he suggested that its staff should be reduced to 
between 300-400 employees and should consist almost entirely of 
professionally qualified persons. They should work, furthermore, on 
behalf of the party's Central Control Commission. The supervisory 
tasks of party and government should be united. The Central Control 
Commission, staffed by workers and peasants, would learn to run the 
state and improve its work; it would also, by delegating members to 
participate in Politburo sessions, supervise what went on in the central 
party apparatus. Lenin specified that not even the authority of the 
General Secretary ought to get in the way of the Central Control 
Commission's interventions.51 
Pravda published 'How We Should Reorganise Rabkrin' on 25 
January. The first draft had been even more pointedly hostile to Stalin. 
Lenin had originally called upon the Secretariat to be more efficient in 
 302 
Lenin: A Political Life 
its preparation of materials for Politburo sessions. 52 He had also 
wanted to claim that the increase in the number of Central Committee 
members would bring about 'a diminution of the personal, accidental 
element in its decisions'.53 This was close to revealing that political 
disputes and personal rivalries existed at the apex of the party, and it 
would have rightly been taken to be an attack on Stalin. Lenin acceded 
to editorial alteration; perhaps he anyway judged it inappropriate to 
give Stalin an early warning of his intentions about him (even though 
Stalin may well have already known through his secretarial helpers!). 54 
And so he limited the references to 'high politics' and personalities in 
his public utterances. Through February 1923 he pondered the issues 
raised in his various recent pieces and finished a 5,000-word 
dissertation on 2 March: 'Better Fewer, But Better'. His cultural pre-
occupations were to the fore. Much as had been done to promote 
working-class people to administrative position in the Soviet state, he 
declared for the first time that such workers were 'insufficently 
enlightened'.55 Further training was needed for them. This was true 
even for those exemplary labourers chosen to fill the Central Control 
Commission: 'It is necesary to work on them for a lengthy period.'56 A 
transformation in culture at every level of politics and in every social 
group was crucial. There was 'bureaucracy' even in the party.57 
But his scheme would not have eradicated it. He had criticised the 
Civil War against the excessive interference of party bodies in state 
administrative matters as being productive of bureaucratic confusions. 
And yet here he was recommending a fusion of Central Control 
Commission and Rabkrin. The propriety of the matter did not concern 
him morally or politically.58 Nor did he worry that the same Central 
Control Commission members who were meant to have the will and 
sophistication to hold the Politburo to heel were themselves to operate 
as mere administrative apprentices to Workers' and Peasants' 
Inspectorate specialists. He mentioned the paradox only to brush it 
aside.59 His proposals for institutional change were light-headed, 
querky and desperate; they came from a man who approved the basic 
structures of the party and state he had helped to create: they were a 
thinking conservative's charter. 
And finally - for these were the last pages ever to be dictated by 
Vladimir llich Lenin- he turned to Russia's situation in world politics. 
The pressures of the great capitalist states could be expected to persist. 
The victorious powers in the Great War had enslaved Germany. There 
were also signs of changes in social policy in the West which, by 
bettering material conditions, might serve to postpone the revolu-
 Deaths and Entrances 
303 
tionary explosion predicted by Lenin since mid-1914.60 But the Great 
War had also shaken the East 'out of its rut'. Global capitalism, 
together with the colonial system, approached the ultimate crisis. The 
problem for the Bolsheviks and the Soviet state was to hold on long 
enough, and he definitively rejected the assumption that the transition 
to socialism in the USSR would be fast. Problems of cultural and 
economic backwardness were a constant impediment.61 Foreign policy 
ought to be oriented upon staying out of international conflicts. 
Capitalism (as he had long ago indicated in his booklet on 
lmperialism),62 could not exist without economic rivalries which 
spilled over into wars. Perhaps the Soviet Union might be protected 
from invasion by conflicts between the great capitalist states. But more 
likely the entire political camp of capitalism would be distracted from 
an anti-Bolshevik crusade by struggles by their respective colonies for 
nationalliberation.63 
The Bolshevik party, hoping for this favourable outcome, should 
concentrate on the maintenance of the supposed leadership by the 
workers over the peasantry. It should also seek to keep the trust of the 
peasants and reduce financial waste, administrative inefficiency and 
political unreliability in the state. The New Economic Policy had the 
potential not only for industrial reconstruction but also for further 
industrial advance. Electrification of the country should be a goal. 
Thus would the Soviet Union endure until the times became propitious 
for the worldwide socialist revolution.64 Lenin the visionary and the 
inspirer of his party declared that 'these are the great tasks I am 
dreaming about'.65 His career ended fittingly with a perspective which, 
while he freely anticipated a troubled future, precluded the probability 
of ultimate defeat. Waiting for the times to change had become, in his 
formulation, a rousing revolutionary summons. Pravda printed his 
piece on 4 March 1923.66 
BREAKING WITH STALIN 
Stalin was troubled by what he knew of Lenin's intentions, and the 
latest articles alarmed him. Early in 1923 he begged Mariya Ulyanova 
to intercede with him: 'I love him with all my soul. Tell him this in some 
way.' But Lenin scoffed at Stalin's words as relayed by his sister, and 
only at her insistence did he coolly consent to return Stalin's greeting.67 
Ill as he was, he was gradually recovering. In January the entire right 
side of his body was paralysed, but he could speak fluently. 68 He was 
 304 
Lenin: A Political Life 
annoyed at his lost powers: 'Look what a memory I've got! I 
completely forfot what I wanted to say! What the belli Astonishing 
forgetfulnessl'6 He was forbidden to read intensively or to discuss 
current politics with those around him. But he ordered a load of books, 
old and new, on themes as various as economics, religion and 
administration; and Mariya and his wife Nadezhda were among those 
who read aloud to him at his bedside.70 By February he looked fitter 
and had recovered a degree of flexibility in his right hand, arm and 
leg.71 His ability to dictate articles gave him an influence on the 
situation in the Politburo. Stalin saw the need for a certain 
compromise. While detesting Trotski, he recognised the danger that 
the alliance between Lenin and Trotski might constitute. Of all people 
it was Stalin who on 6 January 1923 proposed that Trotski should be 
appointed as Lenin's deputy in Sovnarkom with special reponsibility 
for the Supreme Council of the National Economy (and that Pyatakov, 
whose attitude to the New Economic Policy was not unlike Trotski's, 
should head the State Planning Commission).72 Trotski yet again 
refused. On 17 January Stalin suggested that Trotski could combine the 
Sovnarkom deputy chairmanship with the leadership of the State 
Planning Commission; but Trotski was unpersuadable.73 
Stalin may even have anticipated this and wanted to have 
ammunition to fire at Trotski as being very arrogant.74 Trotski 
justifiably maintained that his duties in military administration 
precluded simultaneous attention to the economy. If his Jewish 
ancestry really did inhibit him (and there must be a suspicion that he 
exaggerated his feelings),75 he behaved with an almost total lack of 
circumspection in not making this more widely clear. He also did 
himself no favours by remaining scrupulously silent about the 
surreptitious misbehaviour of Stalin and other Central Committee 
members. He was too loyal for his own good. Unlike Lenin, he did not 
take seriously the threat from Stalin.76 
Lenin had to act fast. Stalin's determination to have his way in the 
Georgian affair was undiminished. Dzierzynski's report on his visit to 
Tbilisi in the previous December was approved by the Orgburo on 13 
January 1923 and passed on to the Politburo. A few days were allowed 
for Mdivani and other dissentient Georgian Bolshevik leaders to raise 
objections, but this was a mere display of courtesy. On 25 January, the 
Politburo confirmed the obfuscatory report of Felix Dzierzynski.71 
Lenin had meanwhile begun to move. Two days before, he had 
completed the final draft of 'How We Should Reorganise Rabkrin' and 
insisted on its acceptance by the Pravda editors. Bukharin, unhappy 
 Deaths and Entrances 
305 
about Lenin's jibes at 'proletarian culture' (which was dear to 
Bukharin's heart) and unwilling anyway to publish so controversial a 
piece, asked the Politburo to give a ruling. Krupskaya abetted her 
husband by phoning Trotski and invoking his help.78 The Politburo 
members met on 24 January. The problem for them was that Lenin was 
well enough to check whether his article was printed. Stalin's colleague 
in the Secretariat, Valeryan Kuibyshev, suggested a plan to deceive the 
'Old Man'. A single copy of the newspaper including the article should 
be printed for Lenin's benefit on 25 January. He would not be told that 
no other copies on that day carried his piece. Trotski opposed 
Kuibyshev and demanded normal publication. At first only Kamenev 
supported Trotski, but eventually it was decided to accede to Lenin's 
request. To have refused him would have required a unanimity in the 
Politburo which did not exist. 79 
Lenin's authority as party leader had not vanished; and, while being 
worried by questions of state administration, he was pre-occupied by 
the political business in Georgia. Also on 24 January he took the 
initiative by setting up his personal group to monitor events. This 
consisted of Lidiya Fotieva, Mariya Glyasser and N. P. Gorbunov.80 
Fotieva was asked to request permission for the relevant documents on 
Georgia to be released for the group's inspection - Lenin knew that 
neither Stalin nor the doctors would allow him to examine them 
directly himself. The choice was not happy. Fotieva and Glyasser were 
as thick as thieves and devoted to Stalin. Glyasser, moreover, was 
demonstrably hostile to Lenin's potential helpmate Trotski.81 Only 
Gorbunov was unlinked to Stalin. But Lenin's advantage lay in his will 
to win, his prestige with Fotieva and Glyasser (who admired him as 
well as Stalin) and the very uncertainty about his health: no one could 
yet be sure that he was doomed. The file compiled by the group could 
not have been more thorough.82 
Having sanctioned Pravda's publication of 'How We Should 
Reorganise Rabkrin', the ascendant leaders in the Politburo 
panicked. They deplored the suggestion by Lenin that, if preventive 
measures were not taken, a split in the central party leadership was a 
distinct possibility.83 On 27 January 1923, consequently, a circular 
letter was sent to the party's province-level committees to indicate that 
the central leadership was not in fact divided. A strong hint was 
dropped that Lenin, divorced from participation in Politburo 
discussions, was not really au fait with current issues. It was signed 
not only by Stalin and Kamenev but also by Trotski.84 The Politburo 
continued to insist that he should not take part in current political 
 306 
Lenin: A Political Life 
business, and Lenin's three-person team were not allowed to ignore 
their prior responsibilities. Thus, although permission was given on I 
February for them to inspect the official materials at the basis of 
Dzierzynski's report, Lenin had to accept that several weeks would be 
required for them to assess them properly.85 Lenin remonstrated with 
Volodicheva: 'Ifl had my freedom, I could easily do all this for myself.' 
He then laughed as he savoured the implications of the word 
'freedom'.86 Meanwhile he put regular pressure on Lidiya Fotieva to 
do a quick and efficient job and to keep to her schedule.87 It is difficult 
to believe that she entirely complied. Not until 3 March did Fotieva, 
Glyasser and Gorbunov present their report to him on the vexed 
questions of the party's politics in Georgia. At last he was ready to go 
to war on Stalin.88 
His resolution was stiffened by a conversation with his wife. 
Krupskaya accidentally blurted out the details of Stalin's behaviour 
on the night of 22 December 1922. Exactly when it was that Lenin 
found out is not known. But his reaction, on 5 March, is well-
documented. He wrote to Stalin as follows: 'You had the rudeness to 
call my wife to the telephone and use foul language on her. Although 
she told you that she agreed to forget what was said, nevertheless this 
fact became known through her to Zinoviev and Kamenev. I do not 
intend to forget so easily what has been done against me, and it goes 
without saying that I consider anything done against my wife to have 
been done also against me. Therefore I ask you to decide whether you 
agree to take back what you said and apologise or you prefer to break 
relations between the two of us. '89 
On the same day he asked Trotski to take up the Georgian 
Bolsheviks' case on his behalf.90 Trotski was urged, too, to contact 
Kamenev, who was not at one with Stalin in the matter and was about 
to depart for the Georgian Communist Party Congress.91 Trotski 
complied, but without the maximum of dynamism- perhaps a sign that 
he was cagey about appearing to make a bid for the supreme 
leadership. Simultaneously Lenin was developing tactics with ever 
greater confidence (even though his physical condition was worsening 
as a result of his mental agitation).92 He had told Mariya Volodicheva 
to hold on to the letter until 6 March. Consultations took place among 
Volodicheva, Krupskaya and Mariya Ulyanova, and Krupskaya 
forbade the letter's dispatch.93 All this was kept from Lenin as he 
dictated a note to Mdivani and Makharadze: 'With all my heart I am 
following your cause. I'm upset at the crudity of Ordzhonikidze and 
the connivances of Stalin and Dzierzynski. I'll prepare some notes and 
 Deaths and Entrances 
307 
a speech for you.'94 Lenin's condition worsened in the night of 6-7 
March. But Krupskaya and Mariya Ulyanova felt unable to delay his 
letter any longer. Volodicheva went out on her errand to Stalin's office. 
He stood up as he read it, hardly able to believe his eyes: 'This isn't 
Lenin who's talking, it's his illness. '95 At first he tried to stand on his 
dignity in replying: 'If my wife were to behave incorrectly and you had 
had to punish her, I should not have regarded it as my right to 
intervene. But inasmuch as you insist, I am willing to apologise to 
Nadezhda Konstantinovna. '96 Subsequent reflection made him just a 
little less truculent. His note as deposited in Lenin's office referred to 
the duty laid upon him to see that no political information reached 
Lenin as he convalesced and to Krupskaya's infringements. He 
admitted to having upbraided her five weeks previously (whereas the 
fateful incident had occurred eleven weeks ago) but claimed there had 
been no rudeness, adding almost casually: 'If you consider, however, 
that the maintenance of "relations" requires me "to take back" the 
above-mentioned words, I can take them back, while refusing, 
however, to understand what is the matter here, where my "guilt" 
lies and what in particular is being asked of me.'97 
Kamenev, who was consulted by Stalin, was appalled by the 'acid' 
quality of his formulations and was convinced that the apology would 
not satisfy Lenin.98 A struggle between Lenin and Stalin on the personal 
and political front was virtually inevitable. How Stalin must have 
regretted that he had not handed the 'Old Man' the cyanide phial! But 
cringe before Lenin he would not. He and Mariya Ulyanova had a 
blazing row by phone: Stalin was adding to the hurts to Lenin's pride 
which would have cost Stalin dearly in due time.99 His own Georgian 
self-esteem and his exasperation after months of frustration and over-
work were bursting the bonds of his self-restraittt. What saved him from 
a goring by the bullish Lenin was nothing he did in his own defence but 
the rapid decline in Lenin's health. The letter was never read out to him. 
On 8 and 9 March he deteriorated further. Next day he suffered a 
massive spasm. He was paralysed all down his right side; he all but lost 
the capacity of speech. His left hand, too, was rendered immobile. His 
participation in the politics of his country was terminated. 100 
MAN IN THE BATH-CHAIR 
The physical deterioration continued. No attempt was at first made to 
move him from the Kremlin, where he had lived over the winter. But a 
 308 
Lenin: A Political Life 
mild, temporary improvement in May 1923 induced the doctors to 
state that, so long as a specially-upholstered vehicle could be provided 
and driven at a slow pace, the patient should be transferred again to 
Gorki. 101 The symptoms were recurrent. Apart from the pain 
associated with the paralysis, he had insomnia and suffered perpetual 
headaches. His appetite faded. He was easily made nervous and 
agitated}02 In mid-July there were further problems. His temperature 
rose steeply, and he had a stomach illness. It looked as if his final crisis 
was at hand. But remission followed within days. He began to sleep 
normally and sometimes to sit up in bed. He could also hobble around 
on the arm of one of his devoted male nurses. Eventually be could 
move independently with the aid of a walking stick. 103 Nadezhda 
Krupskaya and Mariya Ulyanova were in more or less constant 
attendance, and Krupskaya took lessons so as to be able to teach Lenin 
to speak. It was a long job, but he made progress. He tried singing the 
'Internationale'. His will to survive was strong: be even began to write 
with his left hand. 104 On 1 August he was re-learning how to recite the 
alphabet. A week later he demanded that his doctors should allow him 
to read newspapers again. His spirit seemed indomitable.105 
But frequently he became depressed. He hated the doctors. On 31 
July he had exploded in rage about them and drove them from his 
bedside. For a lengthy period they were constrained to 'observe' from 
the safe distance of the doorway of the next room. Only Professor 
Osipov was allowed near, and be on pain of dismissal if he should 
broach the matter of illness. 106 Lenin sometimes fell into despair. When 
Krupskaya told him how well he was doing, he retorted: 'It won't 
last.' 107 She herself had worries, ceasing to believe anything told her: 'I 
now understand that the doctors know nothing.' 108 Once she broke 
down into tears, and Lenin gave her a handkerchief to comfort her. 109 
The strain on her was terrible, and was increased on those days when 
without warning be subjected her to a verbal lashing. And, despite his 
enormous will-power, Lenin also wept profusely. Usually it happened 
when he supposed that no one could notice him. 110 
Lenin was embarrassed at appearing weak and helpless (and this 
embarrassment was subsequently felt by the builders of his cult- it was 
not until the late 1980s that the intimate details of the progress of his 
illness were pulled out of the archives). Lenin's sudden collapses into 
tearfulness would now be considered a normal aspect of his medical 
condition. 111 Alternating periods of deterioration and improvement are 
also characteristic. The doctors treating Lenin were doing their best at 
a time when the understanding of the brain was at a much lower level 
 Deaths and Entrances 
309 
than today. Krupskaya had every right to be sceptical about the 
doctors; and Lenin, remembering that his father had died of the same 
illness in his early fifties, had cause for his underlying pessimism. Not 
that he gave up. Not at all: his capacity for human fellowship was not 
exhausted when he shooed away his doctors. He took well to his 
nurses. One of them, Ekaterina Fomina, had been with him since the 
attempt on his life in 1918. Others he loved were the young medical 
students who worked on shifts as nurses, especially Nikolai Popov and 
Vladimir Rukavishnikov. Petr Pakaln, his bodyguard, was the person 
he especially liked to push him around the ground in the bath-chair 
purchased for him from J. A. Carter and Co, London WC 1.112 In 
addition, he discovered that he was not the sole patient under 
treatment in the sanatorium. None other than Aleksandr Preobraz-
henski, a comrade from his days in Samara in the early 1890s and 
currently an agricultural functionary, was convalescing in another wing 
of the building. They spotted each other by chance, and embraced -
and Lenin decamped for three days to the wing of the mansion where 
Preobrazhenski had a room. 113 
He did not take kindly to articifial efforts to 'entertain' him. 114 He 
knew what he liked and would not be imposed upon. Visits by his 
brother Dmitri's son Viktor, a lively six year old, were especially 
pleasant for him. At Christmas, celebrated according to the Russian 
Orthodox calendar on 7 January 1924, he greeted the children of the 
nearby countryside and passed on a pair of slippers (which he had 
received as a gift) to a little girl who caught his eye. He was far from 
being miserable all the time. 115 But his happiness, such as it was in the 
circumstances, came mostly from what little hope he kept of returning 
to a normal life. He relished, for example, the chance to look after his 
own nurse Popov when he arrived at the sanatorium and was not given 
a meal before his shift began. 116 
The slim prospect of returning to politics kept him going. Krupskaya 
saw this and told him to think of Gorki as his prison. This remark 
horrified nurse Ekaterina Fomina, but his wife knew him well: she was 
reminding him how much intellectual work he had done when held 
captive in the House of Detention in St Petersburg. An appeal based on 
the opportunity for work was the likeliest to get through to Lenin. 117 
On 10 August he insisted on receiving Pravda and other newspapers. 118 
He had recovered enough to be able to glance through them and pick 
the passages he wanted Krupskaya to read out to him. Any effort by 
her to censor the material, for fear of agitating him, was in vain. He 
knew when she was tricking him. This touched him particularly when 
 310 
Lenin: A Political Life 
he asked about associates from earlier periods in his career. Many had 
become his political enemies: Pavel Akselrod, Aleksandr Bogdanov, 
Yuli Martov and Aleksandr Potresov. Krupskaya tried to ignore his 
questions about Martov, who had died in 1923. But she reckoned 
without Lenin's physical recuperation. By autumn he could get up and 
down the stairs by himself, and entered the library to check up on his 
wife's equivocation. He found the relevant copy of the previous year's 
newspaper and discovered for himself the obituary notice. 119 He also 
took an interest in longer pieces of work. He listened as Krupskaya 
read Trotski's recently-published Questions of Everyday Life and 
Maksim Gorki's autobiography My Universities. He managed to read 
some tales by Jack London, chuckling with his wife about his supposed 
'bourgeois moralism'. 120 A few of his fellow Bolshevik leaders came out 
to see him. Nikolai Bukharin was the only one of the first rank; but he 
also saw Evgeni Preobrazhenski, 1.1. Skvortsov-Stepanov, Nikolai 
Krestinski, Osip Pyatnitski and others. Both Bukharin and Preobraz-
henski recorded that, inching his way back towards semi-recuperation, 
he did not delude himself about his ultimate chances. 121 
He was the despair of his handlers. On 18 October 1923 he looked 
out of the window and saw a car. Downstairs he went, sat inside it and 
demanded to be taken to Moscow. 122 Consultations among Krups-
kaya, Mariya Ulyanova, Professor Forster and Petr Pakaln hurriedly 
took place. Dissuasion did not work on Lenin. Perhaps he was in one 
of his temporary moods of elation; or perhaps this was just typical of 
his lifelong will-power. The car set off at the slowest of paces. Lenin 
was beside himself with delight. By chance the passengers discerned 
Professor V. Rozanov on the road and picked him up. They all arrived 
at the gates of the Kremlin towards dusk. Lenin went up to his old 
office and to the meeting room of Sovnarkom. Next day, being a 
bibliophile to the last, he went through his book-cases and retrieved 
three volumes of Hegel. He also perused his own notebooks. Refreshed 
and encouraged, he got back into the car in the early evening and 
returned to the Gorki sanatorium. 123 
In the remaining months of 1923 Lenin went out riding in the car in 
the vicinity. Sometimes he was taken to the woods, where he watched 
the hunters going after foxes and hares. 124 In his bath-chair, he was 
pushed around the gardens next to the house. The doctors were 
impressed at his gusto. He was able, with difficulty, to speak with his 
familiar intonations and to read aloud a little. 125 But worrying 
symptoms still occurred. From mid-October, for example, he 
experienced black-outs lasting 15-20 seconds. At first they happened 
 Deaths and Entrances 
311 
once every three of four weeks, but they became more frequent. Lenin's 
bursts of irritation also returned. 126 The significance of the black-outs 
was at that time little understood. The doctors anyway wanted to 
encourage positive thinking. Professor Feldberg, who had been invited 
to join the medical team, suggested that a complete recovery was 
possible by summer 1924.127 Forster and others remained more 
cautious. The finest available Russian and German medical expertise 
was evidently in a quandary - except for the eccentric judgements of 
the newly-arrived Feldberg. None of them were Bolsheviks: Lenin had 
a highly-developed contempt for those among his comrades who had 
qualified as doctors. But all those physicians at the sanatorium, who 
greatly outnumbered the patients by the end of 1923, were 
conscientious and skilled practitioners of their craft. Not even Lenin's 
hostility to them dispirited them. Whatever their opinions about the 
politics of the leader of world-wide communism, they did what they 
could to secure his recovery. 
THE POLITICS OF MORTALITY 
Lenin's incapacitation over these several months worked to Stalin's 
favour. If the stroke of March 1923 had killed him immediately, then a 
question would have simultaneously arisen about what should be done 
with his 'Letter to the Congress' and his recommendation that Stalin 
should be dismissed from the General Secretaryship. The Thirteenth 
Party Congress had been scheduled for April. Lenin's evident intention 
had been to present his thoughts as dictated to Fotieva and 
Volodicheva in the preceding winter to the assembled delegates (even 
if someone else would have had to read them out aloud). He had added 
the stipulation that, if he were to die, his wife was to have the exclusive 
duty to open the sealed envelopes and reveal them to the party. He had 
been afraid that he might not last out until the Congress. But he had 
not allowed for what actually happened: that he would be alive at the 
time of the Congress but unable to communicate his political wishes to 
those around him. A stay of his proposed punishment of Stalin was the 
result. Stalin meanwhile had a wonderful opportunity to prepare his 
defence. This involved an attack on the one leader, apart from Lenin, 
who was clearly hostile to him: Trotski. It also called for a mending of 
fences in relations with Kamenev and Zinoviev. Kamenev in particular 
had withheld support from Stalin in the Georgian affair. A tripartite 
 312 
Lenin: A Political Life 
coalition of Stalin, Kamenev and Zinoviev was vital to Stalin's 
retention in the core of the central party leadership; and he had to be 
willing even to let Zinoviev enjoy greater prominence than he would 
otherwise have obtained. 
Initially all went well for him. Trotski, having received Lenin's 
materials on the national question (including the draft article where 
Stalin, Dzierzynski and Ordzhonikidze were specifically criticised), 128 
refrained from an unconditional assault on Stalin. In line with Lenin's 
wishes, he spoke with Kamenev about his worries about developments 
in Georgia before Kamenev met the Georgian Bolshevik leaders in 
Tbilisi. Trotski showed solidarity with Lenin's policies but, according 
to his later account, did not seek punishment for Stalin, Dzierzynski 
and Ordzhonikidze. 129 In addition, Stalin had been alerted to the need 
for wariness. Lenin's note demanding an apology to Krupskaya had 
put him on guard; and Trotski, following up the points made by Lenin 
in his article, wrote to Stalin asking him to incorporate several 
amendments in the theses prepared by Stalin for the forthcoming Party 
Congress. 130 
Stalin played cautiously at first. He sent a telegram to Ordzhonikidze 
warning him not to be abrasive towards their Georgian Bolshevik 
opponents in the next few days. 131 Trotski's criticisms of his theses 
were accepted word for word. Stalin even incorporated the point that 
the danger posed to the party by the nationalism of non-Russian 
Bolsheviks was a reaction to Great Russian chauvinist behaviour; and 
the amended version was supplied to Pravda on 24 March. 132 This, 
however, was the 'phoney war' period. At the next meeting of the 
Politburo, on 26 March, Stalin clashed with Trotski. Kamenev, who 
had acted honourably in giving everybody a free voice at the Georgian 
Party Congress, returned from Tbilisi with proposals including the 
transfer of dissentients like Budu Mdivani from Georgia. 133 Trotski 
demanded that Mdivani's group should be relieved of the charge of 
constituting a 'deviation' from Bolshevism; that the 'excessive 
centralism' of the Transcaucasian Federation should be resisted; and 
that Ordzhonikidze should be transferred from work in the region. But 
these requests were turned down.' 34 On 31 March the Central 
Committee plenum supported the Politburo's position. Trotski had 
made only the barest dent in Stalin's armour. Stalin enhanced his 
position at the same plenum when he was seen to support Lenin's 
proposal for an increase in the number of Central Committee members 
whereas Trotski argued against it. 135 Nothing could better illustrate 
Trotski's lack of political nous: the premium on being perceived as 
 Deaths and Entrances 
313 
Lenin's faithful follower had never been higher. Trotski was true to his 
principles at his own cost. 
Then something happened which destroyed Stalin's equanimity. On 
16 April, Lidiya Fotieva returned to her duties after an absence over 
nearly three weeks and informed Stalin, Kamenev and Trotski that 
Lenin had told her, shortly before his last attack, that he intended soon 
to publish the article on Georgia and the national question which he 
had dictated on 31 December 1922}36 Both Kamenev and Trotski had 
discussed its contents. The danger for Stalin was that Lenin had not 
only called for a re-orientation of policy on Georgia but also picked 
out Stalin for specific censure. 137 
Trotski and, at first, Kamenev favoured publication in accordance 
with Lenin's newly-reported wishes. 138 Stalin hit back by telling the 
Central Committee that Trotski had misled the party by failing to 
reveal Lenin's article to the party in due time. 139 Trotski retorted that 
he had had no knowledge that Lenin had wanted immediate 
publication, and Stalin backed down in conversation with him. But 
no written retraction followed, to Trotski's annoyance. 140 Stalin was 
going to brazen it out. He was assisted by the feeling of several party 
leaders, including Kamenev and Zinoviev, that Stalin's humiliation 
would serve to elevate their dreaded rival Trotski to supreme power. 
Mariya Ulyanova took a similar approach. 141 Further consultations 
led to a decision on 18 April to divulge Lenin's article not to the party 
at large nor even to the Twelfth Congress as a whole but instead only to 
the heads of provincial delegations to the Congress.142 This was not a 
mere slap on the wrist for Stalin; but it was short of being a body-blow. 
Stalin also knew that, in Bolshevik debates on the national question in 
the past, he himself had been closer to the core of his party's opinion 
than had Lenin; and he continued to benefit from the fact that Lenin's 
recommendation for the sacking of Stalin from the General Secretary-
ship was unknown to the rest of the Politburo. 143 He could therefore 
weather the crisis. Shamelessly he advocated that Trotski should 
deliver the Central Committee's political report to the Twelfth Party 
Congress. 144 No one could charge Stalin with gratuitous hostility to 
Trotski. Trotski was being wrongfooted at every turn. 
Zinoviev, who was certainly keen to remove the mantle from Lenin's 
back, gave the political report instead; 145 and Trotski did nothing to 
indicate that the Politburo was riven by rivalries. Stalin's speech on the 
national question contained no apology for past misdeeds. On the 
contrary, he laid emphasis on his contention that the Georgian 
Bolshevik opposition to the formation of the Transcaucasian 
 314 
Lenin: A Political Life 
Federation in 1922 showed that nationalism had taken the offensive. 146 
In reality he knew that not even Lenin had urged the dissolution of the 
Trancaucasian Federation. Thus, in the eyes of most delegates, Lenin 
was made to appear closer to Stalin's position than was the case. 
Stalin's bid to seem the loyal and trusted adjutant of Lenin continued 
as he presented Lenin's proposals for internal party re-organisation to 
the Congress. He conspicuously lauded the plan to expand the Central 
Committee and to merge the Central Control Commission and the 
Workers' and Peasants' Inspectorate. 147 At the same time Trotski was 
lulled into complacency by the wording of decisions on economic 
policy. Kamenev, Stalin and Zinoviev made no objection to the calls 
for a greater emphasis on central state planning in industrial 
development. 1411 
'Lenin' and 'Leninism' had, for the first time, become entirely the 
playthings of Bolsheviks other than Lenin. Speech after speech 
professed loyalty to him and the hope that he would soon return. 
Pravda printed a supplement: 'Comrade Lenin on Holiday'. 149 The 
truth about his medical condition, even if allowance is made for the 
optimism of his doctors, was kept from the Congress. Stalin took the 
lead in distorting Lenin's intentions as indicated in his last notes and 
articles. He had already defused the bomb laid for him in relation to 
the Georgian affair. He now removed the detonator placed by Lenin in 
his proposals for the re-organisation of the central party apparatus. 
The expanded Central Committee was filled with opponents ofTrotski; 
the Central Committee was neither able nor wanted to impede the 
actions of Stalin, Kamenev and Zinoviev; and the combined organs of 
the Central Control Commission and the Workers' and Peasants' 
Inspectorate were instruments for Stalin's future assaults on Trotski. 150 
Stalin's increased power began to concern Kamenev and Zinoviev. 
Kamenev had kept a certain distance from him until the Twelfth Party 
Congress; but it was Zinoviev who took the initiative in trying to 
restrain Stalin. In the course of summer 1923 he held a meeting with 
Bukharin and others in a cave near the spa resort ofKislovodsk. It was 
hardly a conspiratorial affair since Kliment Voroshilov, closely linked 
with Stalin, was present. Agreement was reached that Stalin's power 
over the Secretariat should be reduced by introducing others to its 
membership. Even Trotski's name was mentioned in this connection. 
But Stalin reacted subtly. As guarantee that he meant none of his 
colleagues any harm, he acceded to Zinoviev, Trotski and Bukharin 
being invited to attend the Orgburo. He no doubt calculated that their 
other responsibilities would limit their ability to participate. His 
 Deaths and Entrances 
315 
position in the Secretariat, whence Lenin had secretly planned to sack 
him, was secure. 151 
The official campaign to exalt 'Leninism' was intensified. It was a 
term ostensibly resisted by Lenin in his active life since he claimed only 
to conserve, replicate and develop the ideas of Marx and Engels. 152 But 
it was Lenin's 'teaching' that was stated by Kamenev to be the 
'touchstone' of the Politburo's discussions in Lenin's absence. 1s3 Even 
more effusively, Zinoviev declared that the party yearned for guidance 
from Lenin like 'a thirsty man who on a hot summer's day comes upon 
a deep, clear spring to drink his fill'.' 54 Kamenev founded a Lenin 
Institute in Moscow to co-ordinate the research on Lenin and the 
publication of his works. An appeal was issued by Kamenev and Stalin 
for items of Leniniana to be released by their holders. A museum was 
established in Lenin's honour. 155 The veneration of Lenin burst 
previous limits: he was seer without equal; he was doughty national 
hero; he was unblemished saint; he was the light of the world. 
The purpose of the reverential excess was plain: Lenin was to be used 
as a means of gathering support for the central party leaders within the 
party and for the party in society as a whole. The all-purpose cultic 
symbolism was flagrantly instrumental to this end. Stalin was already 
elaborating extravagant projects. According to stories circulating in 
Moscow in the mid-1 920s, he called together Politburo colleagues in 
autumn and argued that a plan ought to be made for the contingency 
that Lenin might soon die. 156 Those present would seem to have 
included Stalin, Trotski, Kamenev, Bukharin, Kalinin and Rykov. 
Kalinin insisted that, if Lenin were suddenly to pass away, his funeral 
should be a magnificent state occasion. But what next? Stalin suggested 
that cremation would offend the sensibilities of most Russians. But he 
was not in favour of ordinary burial either. Instead he intimated that 
'contemporary science' made it possible to embalm his body and 
preserve it for a considerable period. Stalin put this in such a way as to 
imply that he was only relaying a proposal coming from provincial 
party leaders. But he nevertheless outraged Trotski, Kamenev and 
Bukharin. They abhorred the wish to treat Lenin's corpse, whensoever 
it became available as such, as if it were the reliquium of an Orthodox 
Church saint; their Marxist world-view was offended. Only Rykov and 
Kalinin did not directly oppose Stalin, but even they failed to endorse 
his plan unambiguously.IS7 
The question was anyway hypothetical. But Stalin's insistence on 
addressing it showed that he was thinking in greater detail than was 
any rival about the scenario after Lenin's death. 158 The lessening of the 
 316 
Lenin: A Political Life 
threat from Lenin, however, brought the danger of Trotski and his 
supporters more prominently in view. Trotski had missed chances to do 
down Stalin which were not passed up by Stalin in his moves against 
Trotski. Stalin envied his popularity in the country, feared the 
resonance of his ideas among hundreds of party activists and opposed 
- at least at that time - his suggestion that the state should quickly 
intensify its intervention in industry, commerce and agriculture. The 
frail stability of politics under the New Economic Policy appeared to be 
under threat from Trotski. 
Trotski gave him his opportunity in October 1923. Forty six of his 
sympathisers, including E. A. Preobrazhenski, signed a public letter 
criticising the shambles of economic administration in previous 
months. A crisis in food supplies had resulted from peasant 
resentment at the rise in the cost of industrial goods to thrice the 
level of agricultural goods in real terms as compared with 1913. A more 
vigorous policy of industrial development was demanded. Preobraz-
henski also criticised the clampdown on criticism within the party. He 
wanted a return to earlier traditions of debate and decision. Trotski 
belatedly declared his support for the Declaration of the Forty Six. He 
was immediately accused of disloyalty to the principle of collective 
leadership enunciated by Zinoviev at the Twelfth party Congress in 
April. His anti-Bolshevik past was held against him. At the Central 
Committee plenum in October 1923, he stood up to defend himself and 
denied any intention of breaking with the Politburo and planning a 
Bonapartist coup. But he was clear that economic and political 
measures in earlier months had annoyed him. In December 1923 he 
published The New Course articulating these opinions. Dogged by ill-
health and laden with the image of a disturber of the Leninist party 
leadership, he was tactically outplayed. His support in provincial party 
committees was whittled down by the double barrage of Zinoviev's 
arguments and Stalin's organisational manipulations. The scene was 
set for a show-down dreaded by Lenin since 1922. At the Thirteenth 
Party Conference in January 1924 his chances of breaking up the 
alliance of Stalin, Kamenev and Zinoviev were blown to the winds. A 
split in the party, with Stalin and Trotski on opposing sides, was in the 
making; and Stalin consolidated his grasp on the Secretariat of the 
Central Committee. The speed of Trotski's humiliation astounded even 
Stalin's adherents. Only if Lenin were to recuperate and quickly return 
to public office would Stalin's advance on power be reversed. 1s9 
