 3 Only One Year 
THE PARTY-STATE 
Lenin founded a state on principles different from any which had 
existed. There had been states committed to a single militant ideology. 
This had been the case not only throughout the expansionist Muslim 
world in the era after Mohammed's death but also in the countries 
which rejected Catholicism for Protestantism in the sixteenth century. 
But no such state had been secular in avowed purpose, totally and 
aggressively anti-religious. Nor had any of them been dominated, as 
was Soviet Russia, by a single mass political party. The Bolsheviks 
were awesome pioneers in this respect as in many others. The 'party-
state' was their invention. 
They produced this political compound through experimentation. 
They had a general 'project' of revolution, but no elaborated plan of 
inter-institutional relationships. On coming to govern in October 1917, 
they had expected to squeeze power in the party's fist. The penetration 
of the old 'bourgeois' state by revolutionary means was a declared goal, 
and the Bolshevik party was determined to direct the process. There 
was no sophisticated theorising how to act. The assumption was that 
workers, soldiers and peasants would greet the October Revolution by 
participating actively in soviets and other sectional organisations. The 
Bolshevik party would send its representatives to serve and lead these 
organisations. A departure of men and women from party committees 
into jobs in the soviets had begun before the seizure of power on 25 
October 1917; afterwards it turned into a mass exodus. The soviets had 
to be staffed quickly with the party's best cadres. Thus Lenin headed 
Sovnarkom, and local Bolshevik leaders moved effortlessly into the 
chairmanship of their regional, provincial and urban soviets. 
Complaints were made that 'party life', so lively in the early months 
after the monarchy's overthrow in the February Revolution, was 
declining into quiescence. A few secretaries held each party committee 
together between committee meetings which were held with increasing 
infrequency. The party was ceasing to operate as a distinct 
organisation. 1 
This did not bother leading Bolsheviks so long as the Revolution's 
triumphal advance continued and the party's representatives behaved 
58 
 Only One Year 
59 
harmoniously. The period had ended by the second half of 1918. 
Already in January and February, the Brest-Litovsk dispute had 
shaken the complacency of Lenin and his colleagues. Many party 
committees had challenged the official policy in favour of a peace 
treaty with the Germans for weeks after its signature; their members in 
local soviet offices disrupted the flow of governmental business. At the 
Seventh Party Congress, Yakov Sverdlov as Central Committee 
secretary had urged the imposition of 'iron discipline' and 'strict 
centralism'. 2 
No notice was taken of this for several months; not even Sverdlov 
exerted himself.3 But it was a straw fluttering in the wind which became 
a hurricane when the Soviet regime's resources were thrust on to a war 
footing after the Czechoslovak Legion's revolt in midsummer 1918. 
Military co-ordination was a stimulus to reconsider the ties between 
and within institutions. The emergent Soviet state was very ramshackle. 
Old public bodies were retained and headed by Bolsheviks. New bodies 
were also formed. The Cheka and the Supreme Council of the National 
Economy were just two among several. No one, least of all Lenin, gave 
a second thought to demarcating the functions of all the institutions. 
Laws, decrees and informal instructions were not meant to offer 
legislative precision.4 The people were meant to get on with 
'revolution'. Activism was the party's imperative duty. Yet disputes 
about competence and accountability broke out. These were 
exacerbated by a staggering nonchalance about procedures at the 
central political level. In 1918, Lenin and his Sovnarkom colleagues 
were dispatching plenipotentiaries to bring order to food supplies or to 
transport. Local organs of administration were overridden. 5 Doing 
something, even something contradictory to something else being done 
by a comrade, was regarded as better than doing nothing. Again and 
again Lenin said he wanted deeds, not promises.6 
Lenin did not like to delegate power, and he assumed that his 
personal word as a ruler counted for more than compliance with 
formal legislative and executive procedures. Always having despised 
parliamentary democracy, he and Sverdlov issued countless instruc-
tions without reference to the bodies whence they derived authority. 
They co-operated so well that critics charged them with having 
imposed a 'duumvirate'.7 They passed important decrees to each other 
for co-signature. Lenin wrote as chairman of Sovnarkom, Sverdlov as 
secretary of the Party Central Committee or frequently as chairman of 
the Presidium of the Central Executive Committee of the Congress of 
Soviets.8 
 60 
Lenin: A Political Life 
Both men were comfortable wielding power in this informal fashion 
as well as comfortable working with each other. Trotski was the sole 
Bolshevik leader with comparable influence in the latter months of 
1918. He, too, found power to his liking in the Revolutionary-Military 
Council of the Republic. The division of responsibilities was a rough-
and-ready affair. The Revolutionary-Military Council of the Republic 
was to oversee the military aspects of the Civil War, and the Council of 
Labour and Defence would take charge of economic organisation in 
the Red Army's rear while Sovnarkom handled the rest of govern-
mental business.9 No particular function, beyond rubber-stamping the 
wishes of these other bodies, was accorded to the Presidium of the 
Central Executive Committee of the Congress of Soviets; but the 
decline in the regularity of its meetings did not prevent Sverdlov from 
sending out commands in its name. Lenin, Trotski and Sverdlov also 
relied heavily on consultations among themselves -
whether in 
corridors, on the telephone or by telegrams - in order to co-ordinate 
the supreme affairs of state. They all of them were centralisers by 
inclination. They had their disagreements, even disputes. But on the 
whole they tried to keep them out of the public's gaze. If a chink of 
light were to appear between the respective policies of the various 
central bodies, there would be no chance of bringing the chaotic, 
disobedient bodies to heel. The campaign for centralised control over 
soviets, trade unions, factory-workshop committees from Moscow 
continued. Regional, provincial, urban and district levels of adminis-
tration were to respect the principle of hierarchy. 10 
But this objective was not rapidly achievable. Sverdlov's solution 
was that the party should insert itself more decisively into the process. 
He had said as much at the Seventh Party Congress in March 1918. His 
notion was that party life should be revived and that the committees of 
the party at each level of government should regularly and closely 
supervise the several governmental agencies. Not only arbitration but 
active direction should be imposed. 11 If Lenin with What is to be Done? 
in 1902 supplied the intellectual sperm, then Sverdlov's proposal was 
the potential organisational egg wherein would incubate the embryo of 
the new party-state. 
But fertilisation did not quickly occur. Party bodies at the centre and 
in the localities failed to restore the vitality of 1917. The battles by the 
Volga necessitated the mobilisatioq of party cadres. Committees of the 
party perforce operated with ever fewer meetings and full-time staff; 
and the local party leaderships were drastically reduced in size by the 
call-ups into the forces. There was also a reduction in Moscow. The 
 Only One Year 
61 
Central Committee provided its own representatives to the Red Army 
and the governmental and party bodies in the provinces. For example, 
Zinoviev was left behind in Petrograd and Stalin became political 
commissar on the Southern front. Only six out of fifteen full members 
of the Central Committee stayed in the capital in the second half of 
1918.12 Military exigency prevented the central party leadership from 
gathering regularly. Central Committee members themselves did not 
much mind; but a different attitude grew in the provinces. It was all 
very well for Lenin to be complacent. He had inherited and retained a 
large bureaucratic apparatus, and was the linch-pin of central state 
discussions. Local Bolshevik leaders were run ragged by both their 
increasing duties and the loss of administrators to the Red Army. 
Lazar Kaganovich in Nizhni Novgorod and middle-ranking Bolsheviks 
such as N. Osinski and T.V. Sapronov in Moscow were prominent 
critics. They demanded that the party should recover its separate status 
and impose control over all public institutions.13 Thus they aimed to 
streamline activity throughout the state. Without actually using the 
terminology, they proposed to turn the party into the principal 
institution of state. 
Lenin did not declare what changed his own mind in this direction. 
Unusually for a matter of this import, he kept mum. Quite possibly the 
arguments of Kaganovich and Osinski moved him. It is also possible 
that the commission sent out to the Urals under Stalin and Dzierzynski 
to investigate the reasons for the ease ofKolchak's seizure of the city of 
Perm in December 1918 was another. Neither Stalin nor Dzierzynski 
stinted their denunciation of the overlapping areas of responsibility of 
local state bodies. Their report called unambiguously for the party to 
reinforce its institutional control. 14 They must surely have given him a 
bit of a shock. Before their departure for the Urals he had surmised to 
them that the Perm disaster was caused by the drunkenness of a single 
official, M. M. Lashevich. 1s 
This dismissiveness of the matter at hand was no longer possible 
after Lenin had heard from Stalin and Dzierzysnki. And yet the 
revision of policies and practices was still left by him mainly to others. 
It is a misconception of the man that he was permanently obsessed by 
matters organisational; indeed the worry of critics of the Central 
Committee was that he occupied himself altogether too little with them 
in general. Kaganovich and Osinski argued in late 1918 that, if the 
party was to run a centralised state efficiently, it needed to be efficiently 
centralised itself. 16 This theme had been addressed by Sverdlov at the 
Party Congress in March 1918;17 but implementation had been 
 62 
Lenin: A Political Life 
intermittent in subsequent months. Indisputably the central party 
leadership had treated the rest of the party with a growing brusqueness. 
Regional party committees were subordinated to Moscow. The 
Ukrainian Central Committee, which was formally only a regional 
body within the Bolshevik party as a whole, was forced to accept two 
nominees from Moscow in autumn 1918 after an unsanctioned 
Ukrainian uprising against the Germans. Other regional committees 
suffered similarly or even worse: the Moscow Regional Committee 
and, after the Stalin-Dzierzynski report, the Urals Regional Committee 
were simply abolished. 18 But Sverdlov proceeded cautiously below the 
regional tier. Provincial committees were as yet treated more lightly. 
Sverdlov recognised the limitations on his resources in manpower and 
information, and to some extent he still adhered to his old motto for 
the Central Committee and the Secretariat: 'There is no point in 
attempting to do the impossible.' 19 By the winter of 1918-1919 his 
campaign for gradual centralisation was regarded as waywardness at 
best and incompetence at worst. The critics demanded rapid reform. 
Lenin had been involved in particular decisions; and some of them, 
such as those relating to the Ukrainian Communist Party, had large 
implications for Bolshevism throughout the old Russian empire. But he 
refrained from setting an agenda for a broader debate on institutional 
relationships. The old informality, he assumed, would serve him well 
enough. Sverdlov, moreover, continued to serve him well too. There 
had been a plan, drawn up in fact by Sverdlov's wife Klavdiya, to 
introduce greater formality to the central party apparatus. In summer 
1918 she had suggested that a system of Departments be set up in the 
overworked Secretariat. But husband Yakov saw no urgent need for 
reform; and Lenin apparently concluded that, ifSverdlov felt that way, 
then things must be all right. 
BOLSHEVISM'S LEADER 
This complacency about the Central Committee and its Secretariat was 
coming under strain by the end of 1918. The infrequency of meetings 
and the informality of procedures meant that the additional wartime 
tasks were not adequately discharged. At the same time it was 
unrealistic to pull back all Central Committee members serving at the 
front or in the provinces and put them in permanent posts in the 
capital. Lenin and Sverdlov decided that the solution was to equip the 
Central Committee with inner subcommittees. This was not without 
 Only One Year 
63 
precedent. The Central Committee after the Sixth Party Congress in 
August 1917 had selected a group of eleven members to act in its name 
between plenums - and this had been in a period when plenums were 
not rare;20 and, as preparations were put in hand for the October 
Revolution, a seven-man Political Bureau was created consisting of 
Lenin, Zinoviev, Kamenev, Trotski, Stalin, Sokolnikov and Bubnov. 
In practice this body had no discernible impact on the seizure of power 
in Petrograd.21 But the usefulness of inner subcommittees was not 
denied, and a further experiment was undertaken in early October 1918 
when a 'Bureau of the Central Committee' began to meet.22 On 16 
January 1919 the Central Committee met and established an 
Organisational Bureau (or Orgburo) to take charge of internal party 
business. The choice of the three members confirmed Lenin's 
willingness to leave such administration to others: Yakov Sverdlov, 
M. F. Vladimirski and N. N. Krestinski.23 The Orgburo quickly 
became a fixture in the central party apparatus.24 
The Political Bureau (or Politburo) was also re-instated; its duties 
were to oversee the entire range of political, economic and military 
policies between Central Committee sessions. As things turned out, the 
Central Committee met more often in the first months of 1919 than in 
previous months; but this was not an unqualified bonus for Lenin. It 
gathered together personalities who had trouble being pleasant to each 
other. On 5 February 1919 the Central Committee debated the report 
by Stalin and Dzierzynski on the Perm military collapse. Among 
Stalin's recommendations was his call for the high command of the 
Red Army to be investigated.25 This could not fail to annoy Trotski 
and his friends in the Revolutionary-Military Council of the Republic 
who were charged with oversight over the commanders. Central as well 
as local practices were put under scrutiny, and the Orgburo under 
Sverdlov was instructed to prepare a swift report for the Central 
Committee. 26 
Sverdlov alone could not hold Stalin and Trotski apart for very long: 
only Lenin could do this; it was one of his principal accomplishments. 
Stalin had been appointed as food-supplies commissar in southern 
Russia in mid-1918. On 10 July, after observing the situation around 
the Volga city ofTsaritsyn, he had cabled to Moscow: 'For the good of 
the cause, I must have military powers. I have already written on this, 
but received no answer. Very well. In this case I myself, without 
formalities, will turf out those commanders and commissars who are 
ruining the cause. This is what I'm pushed to do by the interests of the 
cause, and of course the absence of a piece of paper from Trotski won't 
 64 
Lenin: A Political Life 
stop me.'27 Subsequently, in September 1918, he was confirmed as 
chairman of the Revolutionary-Military Council of the Southern front. 
His conduct was overweening in the extreme. He inaugurated a reign of 
arbitrary violence throughout the Tsaritsyn region. He arrested not 
only middle-class civilian professionals but also Red Army comman-
ders who had served in the Imperial Army. He intervened in strategical 
decisions. Despite being a political commissar, he took over operations 
in the field; and he dominated the work of civilian party and soviet 
institutions in the locality.28 He also took exception to Trotski's 
appointee as front commander, P. P. Sytin. Trotski had had enough by 
4 October. 'I categorically insist,' he telegrammed to Sverdlov and 
Lenin, 'on Stalin's recalt.'29 Next day he declared no less definitely: 
'Stalin's actions are disrupting all my plans.'30 Sverdlov apparently 
arranged for Stalin to be recalled to Moscow for consultations, and 
Stalin was persuaded to drop his demand that Sytin should be 
dismissed. Stalin's party friends in Tsaritsyn were said to have agreed 
to obey orders from Moscow. In return, Stalin at his own request was 
elevated to membership of the Revolutionary-Military Council of the 
Republic.31 
Stalin's hurt pride was not assuaged. He told Sverdlov that he 
wanted to resume his responsibilities on the Southern front.32 A tactful 
telegram had therefore to be composed by Sverdlov for dispatch to 
Trotski on 23 October: 'In informing you, Lev Davydovich, of all these 
statements from Stalin, I ask you to think them over and give me an 
answer in the first place as to whether you agree to talk things over 
personally with Stalin, for which purpose he is willing to pay a visit and 
secondly whether you reckon it possible, on certain concrete 
conditions, to eliminate the former clashes and arrange to work 
together as Stalin so much wishes.'33 
It was Lenin's convalescence after the attempt on his life that 
brought Sverdlov into such matters, and Trotski began sending top 
copies of correspondence to Sverdlov rather than to Lenin.34 Lenin 
would normally have hated such a loss of personal control, but he was 
reconciled to this temporary condition by Sverdlov's obvious loyalty. 
Welt as Sverdlov had coped, he had not handled the dispute between 
Trotski and Stalin as effectively as Lenin would have managed to do. 
Hostilities were postponed for only a few days even though, for the 
moment, Trotski had consented to sit down with Stalin to discuss their 
disagreements. Stalin continued to bombard Moscow with furious 
telegrams. On 25 October the Central Committee convened under 
Sverdlov's chairmanship- in the presence of Lenin- to discuss Stalin's 
 Only One Year 
65 
claim that there had been sabotage of supplies on the Southern front 
and that front commander Sytin should be put on trial. The Central 
Committee turned him down. 35 Stalin found the personal session with 
Trotski singularly unpleasant. This occurred on the railway between 
Moscow and Tsaritsyn, and Sverdlov took the precaution of attending. 
Trotski repeated his objections to Stalin's contravention of policy 
towards the employment of Imperial officers; he also criticised the 
appointment of inexperienced Bolsheviks such as Kliment Voroshilov 
as Red Amty commanders. 'They're fine lads!' was Stalin's retort. 
'These fine lads,' replied Trotski, 'will wreck the Revolution, which 
can't afford the time for them to grow up!' Trotski insisted that Stalin's 
request to rejoin the Southern front be rejected. Sverdlov took 
Trotski's side: there had to be a limit to the disorganisation. 36 
Yet Stalin was spared total humiliation. The Central Committee 
meeting of25 October 1918 ruled that, ifTrotski wanted those Imperial 
Army officers who had been seized as hostages to be inducted into the 
Red Army, he should ensure that none had belonged to 'the counter-
revolutionary movement'.37 Trotski was also ordered to transfer Sytin 
to Moscow headquarters; and a technical enquiry into the Sytin affair 
was to be headed by V. A. Avanesov, an associate of Stalin.38 
Voroshilov, moreover, was to be allowed to remain as a commander 
on the Southern front. 39 Trotski's ally A. I. Okulov fell out with 
Voroshilov in December, and this time Lenin came down on the side of 
Trotski.40 There was even a perceptible restraint in Lenin's speeches 
about the basic policy of employing Imperial Army officers. He offered 
formal approval; but he did not strive hard to protect Trotski from 
attack by the Tsaritsyn group around Stalin and the rest of what was to 
become known as the 'Military Opposition'.41 
The thing was that Lenin appreciated the advantage of not 
identifying himself too closely with either Trotski or Stalin. The 
Central Committee's leading members acted freely in their respective 
areas of responsibility; but Stalin on the Southern front had flaunted 
his powers more than most. Mayhem had become the norm in 
Tsaritsyn; the torture and killing of hundreds accused of treason was a 
sign of the horrors to come in the 1930s. But Lenin, being a committed 
overseer of terror, mostly turned a blind eye. Stalin offered no threat to 
his primacy among Bolsheviks. The fact that Stalin sent telegrams 
about the Red Army not to Trotski but to Lenin and Sverdlov served to 
bolster Lenin's position; and Stalin obviously enjoyed bragging about 
his own merits: he needed Lenin's sanction in order to advance his 
military career.42 In 1918 Trotski was by far the greater potential rival. 
 66 
Lenin: A Political Life 
His talent was indisputable. Lenin is said to have commented to him 
after the October Revolution: 'And what if the White Guards kill you 
and me? Will Sverdlov and Bukharin be able to cope?'43 It suited Lenin 
admirably that Trotski had to impose organisation and discipline in the 
Red Army. This was looked upon by many party members as dirty 
work. Lenin, smarting from his mauling in the Brest-Litovsk 
controversy, contentedly watched disfavour falling on someone else.44 
And yet he did not want the central party apparatus, despite their 
rivalry, to fall apart. Several Bolsheviks who had been prominent 
before and even during 1917 failed to cope with the tasks of 
government. But Lenin wished to preserve the leading group in 
place, and everyone now knew who the main figures were: Lenin, 
Trotski, Stalin, Sverdlov, Kamenev, Zinoviev, Dzierzynski and 
Bukharin. This inner core held sway by 1918-1919, and would supply 
the major players in the struggle to succeed Lenin.45 
The outcome of that struggle might have been different but for the 
unexpected death of Yakov Sverdlov on 16 March 1918.46 He had 
greatly over-worked himself and had no reserves of physical resistance 
when infected with the Spanish influenza. Only Lenin's premature 
death could have so juddered the politics of the Kremlin. Sverdlov and 
Lenin had at least tried to make the other leaders work with some 
semblance of harmony. No one could accuse him of being an intriguer. 
What made matters worse was that his intense pace of work left him 
little time to keep written records. His memory for facts and people had 
been the equivalent of the Secretariat's archives.47 A rapid reconstitu-
tion of the leadership was required, but no obvious substitute for 
Sverdlov was available.48 Kamenev was an emollient influence, but was 
already heavily laden with duties in the Moscow Soviet. Bukharin, who 
had returned to the Central Committee in midsummer 1918, was pre-
occupied with the editing of Pravda. Neither Kamenev nor Bukharin 
had the combativeness to control the unruly organisations in the 
provinces and the armed forces. Dzierzynski had his hands full with the 
Cheka. Zinoviev was already marked down as the party's choice to lead 
the Communist International. Trotski was at the front. Stalin, when 
not causing trouble for Trotski, operated as a troubleshooter whenever 
and wherever the situation demanded.49 
Sverdlov's death gave impetus for a re-organisation of the central 
party apparatus. The Kremlin dyarchy of Lenin and Sverdlov would 
have been ended in any event. A system of two subcommittees inside 
the Central Committee had already come into existence, and the 
introduction of a set of departments in the Secretariat could no longer 
 Only One Year 
67 
be delayed. 50 As yet the permanent arrangements were undefined. 
Lenin anticipated the re-organisation with equanimity. He was pre-
eminent in the Central Committee. Thorough discussion and efficient 
administration were proclaimed as the objectives. But there was also an 
unspoken aim: the avoidance of unseemly, destabilising disputes of the 
kind which had involved Stalin and Trotski and had consumed the 
energies of Sverdlov as intermediary. Lenin desired the intermittent 
fractiousness to be replaced by unified action in the Civil War. 
THE FIRST CONGRESS OF COMINTERN 
There were few more famous politicians in the world than Lenin. Only 
Lloyd George, Georges Clemenceau, Woodrow Wilson and perhaps 
Trotski equalled him in the public imagination. Nevertheless Lenin's 
practical impact outside the Soviet republic stayed small; his 
international diplomacy had been confined to disclaiming sovereignty 
over western and south-western borderlands of the former Russian 
empire in the Brest-Litovsk negotiations. And yet he retained a vaulting 
ambition. He had been ridiculed at the anti-war socialist conferences in 
Zimmerwald and Kienthal in 1915-1916 when calling for European 
civil war. After the October Revolution he was taken more seriously; 
but no results followed. Lenin and his party were held in quarantine by 
Europe's governments. Adolf Joffe and other plenipotentiaries who 
travelled abroad on Sovnarkom's behalf were barely mentioned in 
daily newspapers outside Russia; and, although Lenin personally copy-
edited German-language versions of his own works, they were not 
widely read. Yet some admirers already existed. The killings of Rosa 
Luxemburg and Karl Liebknecht had the effect of removing two 
critically-thinking leaders who might have resisted the penetration of 
the German Communist Party by Lenin's type of thinking. Even the 
fact that the German Social-Democratic Party won more seats - 163 
out of a possible 421 51 -
than any other party in the Constituent 
Assembly elections of January 1919 and formed a coalition with non-
socialist parties had the advantage that, in time, social-democrats could 
be exposed as having connived in capitalism's survival. 
The snag was that Karl Kautsky and the Independent German 
Social-Democratic Party, which refused to have dealings with the 
German Social-Democratic Party proper, was also rising in popularity. 
A contest took place for support from the politically discontented 
elements in the country's working class. Lenin was thinking flexibly. 
 68 
Lenin: A Political Life 
Detestation of Kautsky did not discourage him from hoping that a 
German Communist Party, once formed, might recruit members from 
the Independent German Social-Democratic Party, and to this end he 
himself drafted a short article. He noted gleefully that G. Laukant, an 
Independent German Social-Democratic Party leader, had dissociated 
himself privately from Kautsky's policies. 52 
This attempt to sow dissent in the leadership of a rival party lay 
unpublished. On reflection he decided that more harm than good might 
result at a moment when he and his Central Committee colleagues were 
laying the ground for a Congress heralded since 1914 in Lenin's 
declarations: the inaugurative meeting of the Third Internationa1.53 
Unlike the Second International, which was avowedly socialist, this 
would be the Communist International. Lenin had sent a memor-
andum on 27 or 28 December 1918 to Georgi Chicherin as People's 
Commissar of External Affairs calling for urgent action, and proposing 
that the conference should be held in Berlin. The basis of the 
invitations should be a particular party's willingness to support soviet 
power and the dictatorship of the proletariat. 54 Precisely why it was in 
the winter of 1918-1919 that the years-old intention of the Bolsheviks 
was to be fulfilled is not clear. But probably Lenin had judged it 
impossible while the treaty of Brest-Litovsk had to be respected on 
pain of German military retaliation. The immediate aim of a 
Communist International would be the fostering of revolution in 
Germany. Lenin also always kept his eyes on developments among 
Europe's socialists; indeed he had paid more attention to them in the 
years both just before and during the Great War than to the military, 
economic and political forces of capitalism'.55 On 3 February 1919 
socialist and trade-union representatives met in the Swiss capital, 
Berne, to re-establish a Second International which remained the object 
of Lenin's contempt. It was a divided gathering; but moves were made 
towards the setting up of a central apparatus as well as towards the 
drafting of a document for presentation to the forthcoming Peace 
Conference at Versailles. Lenin was given additional impetus to call a 
meeting of foreign supporters; and, in accordance with his custom, he 
would let no procedural nicety get in his way. Forward, to the 
Communist International!56 
He arranged a meeting to take place on 21 January 1919 between 
Central Committee representatives, led by himself and Trotski, and 
foreign communists working in Moscow. These drew up an appeal to 
revolutionary organisations abroad to collaborate in a founding 
conference of a new International. Seven foreigners signed the appeal 
 Only One Year 
69 
obligingly written on their behalf by Trotski. s1 All but one signed on 
behalf of parties in eastern and central Europe. The exception, Boris 
Reinstein, appended his name as representative of the Socialist Labor 
Party of North America.s8 Lenin had already asked Bukharin and 
Chicherin to draft a conference plan while he got on with theses 'on 
bourgeois democracy and the dictatorship of the proletariat' for the 
conference. s9 
Lenin opened the proceedings on 2 March 1919 by saying: 'In 
accordance with the behest of the Central Committee of the Russian 
Communist Party, I am opening the first international communist 
congress. '60 Thus he changed the nomenclature from a conference to a 
congress. The difference lent the proceedings a greater implicit 
authority; and, by referring to his party as the initiator of the 
Congress, he emphasised the special role of the Bolsheviks. Lenin and 
his Russian comrades were pulled up short by the German Communist 
Party representative Hugo Eberlein who accurately sensed that his 
Russian hosts would exploit the opportunity to take complete control 
of the Communist International if a consultative meeting or conference 
were to he turned into a full-scale Congress.61 Lenin had a long record 
of immunity to embarrassment about such dodges. But Eberlein 
proved stuhborn.62 Lenin in turn was both exigent and conciliatory. He 
repeated that 'the dictatorship of the proletariat' was crucial. But he 
added, in order to attract any doubting delegates, that the need for 
such a dictatorship had become 'comprehensible to the broad masses of 
workers thanks to soviet power in Russia, thanks to the Spartakists in 
Germany and analogous organisations in other countries such as, for 
example, the Shop Stewards Committees in England'. He added, ill-
informedly, that he had just read a telegram stating that a Soviet of 
Workers' Deputies had been set up in Birmingham and that the British 
government had already given recognition to such soviets as 'economic 
organisations'. Temporary defeat in Germany was less important than 
this durable triumph.63 
Birmingham's clutch of revolutionary socialists would have been 
surprised by such optimism. Lenin perhaps believed the information he 
had received; hut more probably he was bolstering morale. No delegate 
(not even Lenin!) had access to accurate data. Ostensibly the First 
Congress was a victory of international organisation. The thirty four 
delegates included only seven official representatives of the Russian 
Communist Party, and the rest hailed from Europe and North America 
- as well as three from Asia. But the foreign groups they claimed to 
represent were characteristically tiny. The revolutionary grouping in 
 70 
Lenin: A Political Life 
France had fewer than a dozen members.64 Even more to the point: 
only four delegates had needed to travel to Russia. The remainder were 
already resident in Moscow; it was laughable to pretend that such 
persons were not under the control, direct or not, of the Bolsheviks: 
several were Bolshevik party members.65 
Eberlein, however, was one of the four delegates who both had a 
genuine mandate from a serious party and had journeyed from abroad. 
On the Congress's second day, 3 March, he questioned whether the 
time was opportune for the Third International's foundation. The 
Russians were furious, but needed to defeat Eberlein while keeping him 
in the new International. This involved impressing upon everybody 
that the International was not their puppet. The contradictions of the 
records and memoirs of the next two days of consultations indicate the 
skullduggery at play; loyal Bolsheviks, then and later, wanted to 
sanitise the dirty work. After tempestuous discussions, Eberlein 
yielded. On 4 March the delegates ratified their proceedings as the 
First Congress of the Communist (or Third) International.66 On the 
same day Lenin delivered his theses 'on bourgeois democracy and the 
dictatorship of the proletariat'. The Bolsheviks by then had their tails 
up. Nothing in the theses was novel for Russia since October 1917; but 
Lenin sketched ideas which, for the West, were highly unusual. He 
repudiated bourgeois parliamentarianism, extolling the Paris Com-
mune and the Russian soviets.67 'Pure democracy', according to Lenin, 
existed in capitalist countries neither in the past nor in the present; their 
civic freedoms were to the exclusive advantage of the bourgeoisie. As 
an example Lenin cited the brutal killing of Liebknecht and 
Luxemburg. He followed this with a denunciation of the Independent 
German Social-Democratic Party for its hostility to Russian soviets 
and to German workers' councils.68 
Thus the Third International in Moscow marked itself off from the 
parties trying to refound the Second International in Berne. Lenin had 
made the decisive achievement in founding his own International, and 
wisely refrained from pushing the Bolshevik demands too hard. This 
was obvious in what he omitted from his theses. There was scant 
mention of Marx, Engels and Marxism. The theses were taciturn even 
about communism, about civil war, about spreading the revolution by 
force of arms. Nor did Lenin discuss the role of the party. There was 
nothing on centralism, hierarchy and discipline even though these were 
predominant among his party's priorities at the time.69 He also avoided 
an insistence that the Russian soviets should be adopted as a universal 
model.70 
 Only One Year 
71 
The omissions were well-calculated. Hugo Eberlein was kept on 
board and the passage towards revolution in the other countries of 
Europe could be anticipated in the knowledge that fraternal communist 
parties were emerging to collaborate in a worldwide project. Proof of 
the Russian Communist Party's intention to lord it over the 
International came with the choice of authors for the Congress's 
platform, its resolution on the Berne Conference, its theses on the 
international situation and its manifesto. The first was written by 
Bukharin, the second by Zinoviev, the third by N. Osinski and the last 
by Trotski. The platform, accepted by the Congress on 4 March, 
sketched the proletariat's advance to the inauguration of socialism by 
breaking with Kautskyism and overthrowing the bourgeois state 
machine. 71 On 5 March, Zinoviev's resolution on the Berne conference 
resumed the attack on Kautskyism, retailing the Bolshevik version of 
the inter-socialist controversies about the Great War and asserting that 
the Second International currently gave 'service to international 
reaction'. Zinoviev referred to it as the Yellow International.72 On 6 
March, Osinski delivered theses which castigated the Allies as 
trampling the principle of national self-determination underfoot and 
imposing an imperialist peace. The Allies had their own disagreements, 
and Osinski declared that the League of Nations proposed by 
Woodrow Wilson was merely a scheme whereby the USA might 
challenge British and French colonial interests. Capitalism made 
further armaments races and wars certain.73 
Trotski rounded off the Bolshevik contribution with a draft 
manifesto which summarised the deliberations at the Congress in 
typically vivid and compelling language. His tone was defiant: 'To 
demand of the proletariat that, like meek lambs, they should comply 
with the requirements of bourgeois democracy in the final life-or-death 
struggle with capitalism is like asking a man fighting for his life against 
cut-throats to observe the artificial and restrictive rules of French 
wrestling, drawn up but not observed by the enemy.'74 
The reference to Gallic regulations was recondite and spurious: 
Trotski seemed to be confusing wrestling with boules. Nonetheless the 
manifesto was in every other way the Congress document most likely to 
appeal to socialists abroad. This was the last day of the proceedings. 
The decision was taken to form an Executive Committee to take charge 
of the International until its next Congress. Bolshevik hegemony was 
secured by the proviso that, once a party had declared its allegiance to 
the International, 'comrades of the country' already resident in 
Moscow should represent it on the Executive Committee until the 
 72 
Lenin: A Political Life 
party's nominee could take a seat (and the Executive Committee 
reinforced the Bolshevik position by electing Zinoviev as its chair-
man).75 Lenin, having opened the Congress modestly, closed it in 
similar vein. But there was no denying his triumph as he proclaimed to 
the world: 'Not only in the East European countries but also in the 
West European countries - and not only in the defeated countries but 
also in the victorious countries such as England [sic: R. S.] the 
movement in favour of the Soviets is spreading further and further; and 
this movement is nothing other than a movement aimed at the creation 
of a new, proletarian democracy: it is the most significant step forward 
to the dictatorship of the proletariat, to the complete victory of 
communism.' As if regretting an absence of grandiloquence, he added: 
'The victory of the proletarian revolution around the entire world is 
guaranteed. At hand is the foundation of an international Soviet 
republic.'76 
OPPOSITION: PARTY AND ARMY 
And yet the Bolshevik party, away from the gaze of Communist 
International delegates, was riven by disputation. Two controversies 
had broken out. The first resulted from worries about the party's 
organisational condition, the second from even greater annoyance with 
official policy on arrangements in the armed forces. Neither dispute 
was completely public. A show of solidarity was needed in wartime. 
Yet feelings behind the scenes ran high. Lenin, especially after 
Sverdlov's untimely death, was blamed for failing to co-ordinate the 
civilian party apparatus; Trotski was castigated for co-ordinating the 
armed forces to the detriment of party traditions and personnel. Of the 
two, Lenin got away the more lightly; and, unlike Trotski, he had not 
fallen out with any major colleague. Stalin wanted to stab Trotski 
politically in the back and waited till the Eighth Party Congress for his 
chance. 
At Trotski's request, the campaign in the press against Trotski's 
measures in the Red Army was restricted. But even this exasperated 
Trotski, who sent a furious telegram to the central party leadership. 
His complaint was upheld, and Nikolai Bukharin as editor of Pravda 
was instructed to ban debate from its pages.77 The campaign about 
civilian party organisation also reached the press. But it was milder not 
only in Moscow but also in the provinces. The leading Bolshevik in 
Nizhni Novgorod, Lazar Kaganovich, insisted that organisational 
 Only One Year 
73 
reforms had not been carried far enough. His theses as published in 
Moscow asserted that 'until now there has been no strong organisa-
tional centre'. Instead he called for a system of two inner 
subcommittees to be installed in the Central Committee.78 He 
appeared to be unaware that Lenin and Sverdlov had already initiated 
such a system.79 But this would anyway not have satisfied him. What 
Kaganovich wanted was the strictest centralism. Internal democratic 
practices, including elections, were to be discarded as unnecessary.80 
No wonder Kaganovich later became a crony of Iosif Stalin! And yet, 
plainly-spoken though he was, he named no names. I. M. Vareikis in 
Simbirsk was less restrained. Incensed by Sverdlov's criticism of local 
party bodies who opposed official policies, he countered that these 
policies were articulated so vaguely and intermittently as to be next to 
useless. Guilt should therefore be laid at Sverdlov's door.81 A further 
group of Bolsheviks, which became known as the Democratic 
Centralists, was equally determined to eradicate the organisational 
malaise. Timofei Sapronov, Vladimir Maksimovski and Nikolai 
Osinski in Moscow province were prominent among them, calling for 
the party to be co-ordinated more tightly. The Central Committee was 
castigated by them for its 'extreme inertia'. And yet, while calling for 
central planning and functional specialisation, they demanded a return 
to democratic procedures in the party. Authoritarianism, they claimed, 
deprived the Bolsheviks of the organisational dynamism that had 
served them well in the October Revolution.82 
In public only Sverdlov was mentioned; but privately it was a 
different story. A sense had been growing in late 1918 that the so-called 
duumvirate of Lenin and Sverdlov had to be brought to an end. 
Lenin's prestige, as well as sympathy for him as he convalesced, 
protected him from direct criticism. But both of them were expecting to 
be buffeted by complaints at the Eighth Party Congress. No one felt 
that Lenin did not work hard. Nor could there be any suspicion that 
Sovnarkom would be more efficiently organised under someone other 
than Lenin. Yet he had neglected the central party apparatus; and, even 
when he had embarked on reforms with Sverdlov's help, he had not 
deigned to inform the party in the provinces.83 Even so, those who 
criticised him most strongly gave him the benefit of the doubt. Osinski 
was to write to him after the Congress acknowledging that he was the 
only conceivable supreme leader for the party. Lenin was gently chided 
not so much for lacking organising talent as for omitting to take 
measures to support himself with a carefully-co-ordinated team of 
organisationally-talented personnel. 84 
 74 
Lenin: A Political Life 
The figure of Trotski by contrast evoked outright resentment. His 
early anti-Bolshevik career had led many to demur at his recruitment to 
the party in mid-1917. He had been the source of much friction, too, in 
the Brest-Litovsk controversy.85 But his activity as People's Commissar 
for Military Affairs since spring 1918 had given the greatest offence. He 
conscripted Imperial Army officers. He enforced the ban on party 
committees in the Red Army. He restored aspects of the discipline and 
organisation of the Imperial Army. He rode around on horseback as if 
he were a traditional commander-in-chief. He sanctioned the shooting 
of the communist activist Panteleev for cowardice in the face of the 
enemy.86 While no one questioned Lenin's sincerity, Trotski came 
widely under suspicion as the cuckoo in the Bolshevik nest. Trotski, 
unlike Lenin,87 chose to engage in dispute rather than hide behind the 
collective decisions of the Central Committee. Trotski admitted in 1919 
that 'Bonapartism' might arise in the revolutionary army; but the more 
acute danger to the Soviet state, he averred, stemmed from Bolsheviks 
in the armed forces who were incompetent or obstructive.88 Such was 
his confidence that he asked the Central Committee for permission to 
absent himself from the Eighth Party Congress and return to deal with 
the emergencies at the front. 89 
Trotski had mentally cocooned himself. Lenin and Sverdlov had 
largely supported his particular decisions as People's Commissar for 
Military Affairs; but they had refrained from commenting often on 
those particular issues agitating his critics. They themselves had 
fulminated against kulaks, landlords, priests, factory-owners and 
bankers. They had sanctioned the execution of the former Emperor. 
They could not bring themselves to express a kindly attitude to the 
Imperial army officers. Lenin did not disavow Trotski's policy; on the 
contrary, he spoke several times in the winter of 1918-1919 in favour of 
the enlistment of 'bourgeois specialists' in the Red Army.90 But Trotski 
had had to persuade him hard. Apparently it came as a surprise to 
Lenin to learn that the Reds had had to induct no fewer than thirty 
thousand Imperial officers in order to keep armed forces of any kind in 
the field. Thereafter, according to Trotski, Lenin supported Trotski.91 
As late as 13 March, however, Lenin avoided antagonising Trotski's 
critics and referred to them at a meeting in Petrograd as 'belonging to 
the numbers of the most dedicated and convinced Bolshevik-
Communists'.92 Yet he coupled this with support for Trotski's 
policy. A set of theses was composed by Trotski on 20 February en 
route to Petrograd and, on their publication five days later, became the 
Central Committee's official proposal for submission to the Eighth 
 Only One Year 
75 
Party Congress.93 On 14 March, still not having departed for the front, 
Trotski chanced his arm by getting the Central Committee to agree to 
prohibit leading Bolsheviks in the Red Army from attending the 
Congress unless a special request were to be made.94 In Trotski's 
anticipated absence the Central Committee chose G. Y. Sokolnikov as 
its rapporteur on the military question.9s Objections had been made by 
political commissars against what they regarded as an attempt to gag 
them. Trotski denied that there had been a trick of any kind. But he 
had to give way on the practical demand: his opponents were given the 
right to stay in Moscow for the Congress.96 In addition, Lenin further 
assuaged Stalin's feelings by recommending his appointment as 
People's Commissar for State Control (even though this was passed 
only on a split vote). Stalin and Trotski barely concealed their mutual 
hostility. It was becoming almost automatic for them to oppose each 
other's requests for personnel transfers (as indeed occurred at the same 
meeting of the Central Committee).97 
Stalin also adroitly encouraged Trotski's adversaries outside the 
Central Committee. The informal name for them was the Military 
Opposition. Some wanted greater party influence in the Red Army and 
hated the Imperial officers. Stalin and his associates Kliment 
Voroshilov and Semen Budenny fell into this category. Other members 
of the Military Opposition, such as V. M. Smirnov, by contrast 
demanded the 'democratisation' of the armed forces and disliked 
Stalin's approval of centralisation and hierarchy. Still others came to 
the Military Opposition directly from the Left Communists who had 
opposed the treaty of Brest-Litovsk. Sergei Minin, who had befriended 
Stalin in Tsaritsyn in mid-1918, was the most prominent such 
individual.98 But the higher purpose of defeating Trotski brought 
them to terms. That they meant business was proved by the decision of 
a disconcerted Central Committee to put 'the military question' at the 
top of the Congress agenda.99 By returning to the front, Trotski was 
showing revolutionary dutifulness and personal arrogance at the 
expense of political sense. Lenin would not have made the same 
mistake. 
THE EIGHTH PARTY CONGRESS 
The Eighth Party Congress assembled after supper on 18 March 1919. 
Lenin delivered a eulogy of the late Yakov Sverdlov. 100 His political 
concerns quickly emerged. International relations had dominated the 
 76 
Lenin: A Political Life 
previous Party Congress, and most party officials had been swept into 
military work in subsequent months. Yet Lenin told the 263 voting 
delegates that the crucial current question was the party's attitude to 
the 'middle peasantry'. 101 Only then did he mention the foundation of 
the Third International.102 Descent into the usual squabbles over the 
presidium, the mandate commission and the official agenda ensued. 
Lenin was curt with refusals to serve on such bodies: 'You can't 
decline, comrade Muranov. You'll only hold up the Congress with 
this.' 103 But the atmosphere was lightened when, speaking first in 
German and then in French, he invited foreign communists to join him 
on the platform. Bolsheviks applauded thunderously. 104 
There were shouts of 'Long live llich!' as he delivered the Central 
Committee's report. 105 He showed no mercy, even retrospectively, to 
the opponents of the Brest-Litovsk treaty, accusing them of 'an 
incorrect and non-Marxist' viewpoint. 106 These included not only Left 
Communists but also the Mensheviks and Socialist Revolutionaries. 
Yet he also reckoned that a flexible policy towards the other socialist 
parties needed to be maintained. He did not rule out the possibility that 
a number of their members might come over to Bolshevism. But he still 
speculated that Dzierzynski might need to put them against a wall and 
shoot them. 107 The party had also had to feel its way in building a Red 
Army. Experimentation had been necessary: Marx and Engels had 
offered no specific doctrine. Lenin argued that to repudiate the use of 
'bourgeois specialists' would be infantile.108 At last he had openly came 
off the fence on to Trotski's side. The Soviet republic, he asserted, had 
to avail itself of the expertise available from the legacy of capitalist 
culture. He even claimed that, until spring 1918, the regime's measures 
in many ways carried through a bourgeois revolution. Thus the Decree 
on Land expropriated the gentry but left the kulaks untouched. Lenin 
suggested that it was only with the creation of the committees of poor 
peasants that the rural dimension of the October Revolution entered its 
'proletarian' phase. Why was he so proud of this? These same 
committees had been denounced in December 1918, and Lenin even 
now stated that the anti-kulak campaign had battered the middle 
peasants. 109 Essentially he was claiming that policies had been right 
and implementation faulty. Lenin remarked: 'Organisational activity 
has never been a strong side of Russians in general and Bolsheviks in 
particular, and meanwhile the main task of the proletarian revolution is 
precisely an organisational task.' 110 
This indirect defence of the Central Committee was attacked by local 
leaders resenting the slights delivered to lower party bodies. 
 Only One Year 
77 
Democratic Centralist N. Osinski made criticisms, and a brief 
discussion ended with an endorsement of the central leadership's 
political but not its organisational leadership. 111 Lenin was spared a 
further bruising by the lateness of the hour, by his prestige and by the 
Congress's knowledge that the mastermind of the Secretariat, Yakov 
Sverdlov, was no longer alive to answer the accusations. 
The second session, next morning, was opened by Nikolai Bukharin 
with a report from the commission writing the party programme. 112 
His words were curiously bland until he came to the national question. 
Citing Stalin's speech to the Third Congress of Soviets in January 1918, 
he proposed a formula offering 'the self-determination of the labouring 
classes of each nationality'. 113 This formula reflected a narrowing of 
Lenin's ideas since before the Great War, when he had advocated 
national self-determination in general. Yet Bukharin, who had never 
disguised his distaste for concessions on the national question, had not 
got everything his way. The agreed draft programme stated that any 
proposal of secession from the Soviet republic would need to take 
account as to what phase of 'historical development was occupied by a 
given nation'. 114 Bukharin had exhaled no hostility towards Lenin. But 
his inoffensiveness was not reciprocated: Lenin breathed fire and 
brimstone in his complementary report. Firstly, he insisted that the 
programme should describe Russian capitalism in its early as well as its 
advanced stages. This was no quibble. Lenin wanted the programme to 
state that the wartime dislocation had induced massive economic 
regression. Bukharin's warnings about 'finance capitalism' annoyed 
him. 115 Lenin particularly asserted the 'right of nations to self-
determination'; and, noting that Bukharin appeared to accept the 
application of this notion to industrial societies such as Germany, 
Lenin reminded the Congress that the German working class had not 
become politically 'differentiated' in its entirety from the German 
bourgeoisie and that any referendum of German workers would not 
necessarily result in a vote for socialism. 116 
This was a neat dissection of Bukharin's argument. But the knife was 
double-edged: it also cut back into Lenin's suggestion that a 
proclamation of the right to national self-determination would speed 
up the installation of socialist regimes. But Lenin was a master of 
rhetorical distraction. Turning to Bukharin, he asked whether he had 
forgotten about the Bashkirs. Lenin affirmed that the granting of an 
ethnically-based autonomous administration (which he hoped to repeat 
in relation to the Kirgiz, Uzbeks, Tajiks and Turkmens) was the most 
effective way to secure support for socialist policies and for a 
 78 
Lenin: A Political Life 
diminution of the influence of the mullahs. 117 He ended on a high note, 
suggesting that a policy of national self-determination in Poland was 
already yielding fruit. Warsaw workers were supposedly adopting 
communist policies. He acknowledged that 'a decree has not yet been 
issued for all countries to live by the Bolshevik revolutionary calendar', 
but insisted that the prospect of European revolution had not 
vanished. 118 
Debate on the party programme was resumed in the evening. Georgi 
Pyatakov, Lenin's oldest Bolshevik opponent on the national question, 
attacked him. Finnish independence, granted by Lenin to Svinhufvud 
in December 1917, was castigated as a fiasco. No socialist revolution 
had resulted from it. 119 Pyatakov was even more anti-nationalist than 
Bukharin and denounced even the slogan of 'the self-determination of 
the labouring classes of each nationality'. He denied, for example, that 
Ukrainian workers should have the right to prevent union with Russia 
if soviet republics were already to have sprung up in Austria and 
Germany. A single economic centre ruling across a unified socialist 
space would be essential. 120 L. B. Sunitsa agreed with Pyatakov that the 
interests of 'the worldwide combat organisation of the proletariat' 
should be paramount. 121 Even N. Osinski, who approved of Lenin's 
formulation, accepted it only as a 'demonstrational slogan'. 122 By this 
he meant that it was a useful means of fooling non-Russians that the 
party was more favourable to national self-determination than it really 
was. 123 Only Central Committee colleague Aleksei Rykov supported 
Lenin unequivocally. 124 Lenin, of course, did not intend to facilitate 
demands for separation from Russia by non-Russian nations. But, 
unlike Osinski, he refused to admit this even in the privacy of the Party 
Congress. His main adversary in any case was Pyatakov. As Lenin put 
it, 'Come across any communist and you'll discover a Great Russian 
chauvinist!' 125 Furthermore, the rest of the Congress's agenda was long 
and time was pressing, and Lenin was spared the risk of putting his 
formulation to a vote. Instead a commission was set up, including both 
Lenin and Bukharin, to finalise the draft programme. 126 
On 20 March, Zinoviev reported on the Communist International. 
He told the Congress about the news from Munich and predicted a 
German socialist revolution was maturing. 127 Zinoviev roused the 
Congress by claiming that the Russian Communist Party had won the 
right to exercise ideological leadership over all far-left socialists, and 
his report was unanimously approved. 128 G. Y. Sokolnikov, reporting 
on the military question, had worse fortune. He referred to the system 
of political commissars in the Red Army as a success and maintained 
 Only One Year 
79 
that it would not be sensible to sack the officers conscripted from the 
old armed forces. 129 Trotski was not present, but had supplied theses 
for the Congress. 130 An opposing report was delivered by V. M. 
Smirnov, who spoke to his own theses. The tsarist style of discipline; 
the privileges of many officers; the restricted authority of political 
commissars like himself; the absence of collective decision-making; the 
party's fragile control over the Red Army: these were again his points 
of objection. 131 
The diametrical opposition of viewpoints induced delegates to hand 
the matter over to a special section of the Congress for preliminary 
discussion. This was a very rancorous debate. Trotski was routinely 
denounced. 132 Sokolnikov and others struck back, but it was a lost 
cause. 37 out of 57 participants voted for Smirnov and against 
Trotski. 133 This was a massive defeat for the Central Committee. 
Sokolnikov, who had merely been carrying out the instructions of Lenin 
and Trotski, wanted no further part in the matter. He had no military 
experience and rued his involvement in the debate; and, together with 
the minority of the section, he walked out. 134 The fifth session of the full 
Congress met late on 21 March to deal with the shambles. 135 Lenin 
determined to stay clear of the dispute if at all possible. S. I. Aralov, 
Trotski's subordinate in the Revolutionary Military Council of the 
Republic, spoke on his behalf on the situation on the war fronts. 136 
Then came the debate on the Trotski-Smirnov disagreement. Smirnov 
had already had to make compromises. In particular, the majority of 
the Congress section had rejected his demand for collective decision-
making. 137 But this amendment stemmed from a desire to reinforce 
discipline and initiative in the Red Army; no attempt was being made to 
let the Central Committee down lightly. 
Nerves snapped when A. I. Okulov, another of Trotski's staff, 
condemned the Bolshevik leaders on the Southern front who had 
notoriously imprisoned 'military specialists' on a river barge rather 
than admit them into their forces. 138 Next to speak was Southern front 
commissar Voroshilov, who described cases of sabotage by the 
Imperial officers and told the Congress that, if he had hearkened to 
Lenin's advice, the rapid occupation of the Ukraine by the Reds would 
not have occurredY9 Both Voroshilov and Stalin, moreover, 
disingenuously stressed their acceptance of military specialists in 
principle; and Stalin added that he disapproved of those of Smirnov's 
theses which were likely to undermine strict military discipline. Stalin 
refrained from criticising Lenin; indeed he contrived to avoid direct 
criticism of the Central Committee's position. 
 80 
Lenin: A Political Life 
Yet his disagreements with Lenin were evident. Ignoring Lenin's call 
for reconciliation with the middle peasants, Stalin stressed what a 
danger was posed by them. They revolted in the rear, they were 
recalcitrant conscripts. Force alone could keep them on the Red 
side.140 Lenin waded in. He was airily dismissive of the talk of Smirnov 
and his supporters about the 'autocratic-feudal' regulations in the 
armed forces. He also supported Trotski, affirming that Trotski's 
policy and the policy of the Central Committee were one and the same. 
Turning to the Southern front, he acknowledged that he had 
occasionally fallen out with Stalin and that Stalin had not always 
been proved unjustified in his views. 141 The sting came in the tail. Lenin 
revealed that the Bolsheviks on the Southern front had lost 60,000 men 
in battles against forces which were numerically inferior by far. A more 
rational use of political commissars would have saved lives. His 
accusation stopped just short of implicating Iosif Stalin.142 But 
everyone knew that Stalin had stirred things up behind the scenes. 
Lenin himself comported himself with decorum, admitting that he was 
'not only not a military specialist but not even a military person'. Lenin 
repudiated Stalin's implied charge that the leadership of the Red Army 
was thwarting the Central Committee's will. Trotski's name had to be 
cleared, and Lenin did this without compunction. 143 
If Stalin restrained his criticisms, Smirnov felt no such inhibition and 
derided Lenin for his 'military innocence' .144 He also took a final swing 
at Trotski before his own amended theses were read out to the 
Congress. 145 But his effort was in vain. It was the theses ofTrotski and 
Sokolnikov that, on reflection, the Congress chose to adopt as a basis 
for its resolution. Lenin had cast in his lot with Trotski, and the 
delegates were not inclined to rock the boat in wartime. 146 
A five-man commission was established at the sixth session of the 
Congress on 22 March to finalise the Trotski-Sokolnikov composite 
motion. Stalin had played his hand cleverly enough to be selected for it 
as a member of those 174 delegates (against 95) who had voted on 
Lenin's side. 147 Quickly the Congress moved to Zinoviev's report on 
the organisational question. He came before the Congress after 
sustaining quite a verbal battering in the sessions of the closed 
organisational section in the previous two days. N. Osinski in 
particular had claimed that, while Lenin and Sverdlov had been 
acting as the Central Committee, there had been 'no political line'. 
Policy had been made on the hoof; systematic deliberation and 
communication had been absent. 148 Fellow Democratic Centralist 
T.V. Sapronov repeated the charge.149 L. M. Kaganovich, despite 
 Only One Year 
81 
feeling that the Central Committee erred through too frail an attempt 
at centralism, railed at Osinski as being insincere.150 Osinski, retorting 
that Lenin himself had admitted that 'personal politics' had been 
developing, focussed on the bureaucratic phenomena in party and 
government and demanded a return to the elective principle. But his 
main recommendation was simply that a majority of Central 
Committee members should belong to Sovnarkom. 151 Sapronov 
supported him: he complained that too many abuses of power were 
reversible only by face-to-face pleadings with Lenin, who would then 
intervene directly. Far too many unaccountable organs had been 
established. 152 And this time Kaganovich, adherent of a neat chain of 
command, agreed with the Central Committee's critics.153 
Zinoviev's speech to the full Congress repeated his message to the 
organisational section; and, in the seventh session that evening, critics 
in tum repeated their complaints. But Zinoviev was helped by the news 
from Hungary. A Soviet republic had been proclaimed in Budapest. 154 
Kamenev then reported for the commission on the party programme 
and went over the amendments made to the draft produced before the 
Congress. Lenin, before the start of the Congress, had wanted the party 
to declare a commitment to 'the freedom of secession for nations in 
reality'; during the Congress debates he had advocated the same 
freedom but had refrained from using the same terminology.m In 
commission he compromised with Bukharin on his formulation, stating 
that 'colonies and nations with unequal rights' should have the right to 
secession.156 This was a fudge. Lenin could claim that it indicated a 
commitment to self-determination, Bukharin that the reference to 
unequal rights was not applicable in the areas under the party's control 
(since the Soviet Constitution guaranteed national equality). When 
Pyatakov rose to force a vote on his own critical amendment, he lost. 
The programme was accepted unanimously. ts7 
Yet the 'national question', which did not appear on the Congress's 
agenda, remained contentious. The gap between Lenin and Bukharin 
(and Stalin) had not been bridged, and the bruising disputes of 1920--
1923 would show how wide it was. 158 A fudge also occurred on the 
military question. Reporting back from the Congress, E. M. Yar-
oslavski (who disliked Trotski) spoke warmly in favour of Trotski's 
theses and said that he had never in any case objected to them in 
general principle. 159 The Trotski-Sokolnikov motion was then passed 
unanimously and with only one abstention. 160 The amendments in 
commission had been few. A couple of Trotski's provocative sentences 
had been excised. 161 But Sokolnikov had been compelled to make 
 82 
Lenin: A Political Life 
further concessions. Clauses were introduced on the need for 
'centralised party-political control' over the Red Army; for the 
promotion of 'proletarians and semi-proletarians' to command posts; 
for political commissars to have the right to have disciplinary sanctions 
over commanders; for a reduction of the old-style military regulations; 
for the establishment of a Political Department of the Revolutionary-
Military Council of the Republic under the leadership of a member of 
the party's Central Committee. 162 The net result was a compromise. 
The party was to be placed at the core of military organisation; and, 
although Imperial army officers were no longer to be rejected as on the 
Southern front, the rights of political commissars under the party's 
supervision were enhanced. This compromise was pleasing to Lenin; 
but Trotski, on learning how proceedings had gone, was furious: the 
dispute was not yet at an end. 163 
The whole Congress showed that the mood of party officials, central 
and local, had to be taken into account if the existing central leadership 
was to keep the party actively on its side. Lenin understood this; 
Trotski did not. But even Lenin failed to follow things as closely as he 
had needed. The question of the middle peasants, which he had 
declared to be the crucial question for the Congress, had barely been 
discussed; and such discussion as had taken place was frequently 
inimical to Lenin's demand that these peasants should be treated 
gently. 164 Reporting for the Congress agrarian commission, he 
repeated that 'no acts of violence [italics in original)' against them 
were permissible. 165 He rebuked those who wished to coerce the rural 
population into a system of socialist collective farming. Only when the 
regime had 100,000 first-class tractors at its disposal, he asserted, 
would it be conceivable that most peasants would accede to this; and he 
continued: 'But in order to do this it is first necessary to conquer the 
international bourgeoisie, it is necessary to force it to give us those 
tractors; or else it is necessary to raise our productivity to such a point 
that we can provide them ourselves.' 166 
The briefest of debates followed. Among the speakers, a certain 
Panfilov criticised Lenin's pessimism and especially recommended 
collectivisation for the prosperous agricultural communities of 
Ukraine. 167 This was in line with contributions made by V. V. Kuraev 
and others behind the scenes in the commission. A greater emphasis on 
class struggle and socialist collective farms had been frequently 
demanded. 168 Lenin had not been without support, 169 but had had to 
speak robustly to bend the commission his way. Its members knew 
that, in the final analysis, theirs was not the item at the front of the 
 Only One Year 
83 
Congress's attention. Kuraev therefore acceded to Lenin's insistence 
that the middle peasant question should dominate the draft proposed 
by the commission. 170 The Congress then passed the motion 'on the 
relation to the middle peasantry' unanimously. 171 Lenin announced the 
results of the Central Committee elections. As usual he headed the 
votes. His concluding remarks emphasised the universal assent greeting 
motion after motion. By exaggerating the party's unity, he hoped to 
bring it about in reality. The fissiparous political tendencies had to be 
overcome. The Whites had to be defeated. No hint of military crisis 
was given by him: it was as if the Central Committee had not enjoined 
Trotski to confront Kolchak. Lenin brightly assured the Congress: 'We 
are convinced that this will be the last heavy half-year. '172 The 
Hungarian socialist revolution pointed the way to the future. 'The 
beast of international imperialism', he affirmed, was expiring. 'This 
wild beast will perish and socialism will conquer throughout the 
world!' 173 
THE PARTY PROGRAMME 
The development of Lenin's political ideas ought not to be assessed 
exclusively through books he wrote such as What Is To be Done? and 
The State and Revolution. For the programme accepted by the Eighth 
Party Congress was predominantly his programme. He wrote the main 
draft and chaired the Congress commission which accepted it as its 
basis for discussion; and it was this draft, too, that was debated and 
sanctioned by Congress. 174 He proof-read it for publication as if he 
were the sole responsible author. He took his usual care, noting the 
persistent misspelling of 'exploitation' and explaining the word's 
origins to the offending print-worker. 175 The programme offers 
insight into the kind of society which he wanted to build. Not since 
The State and Revolution had he produced so comprehensive a 
medium-term statement, and his commitment to it was to outlast the 
Civil War. 
The preamble declared that the October Revolution had 'realised the 
dictatorship of the proletariat' .176 There was a discreet abandonment 
of the idea, as proposed by Lenin in 1917, that workers and poor 
peasants would jointly rule Russia. 177 The proletariat was to rule alone. 
Its victory in all capitalist countries was affirmed to be as inevitable as 
the immiseration of the working class had been under capitalism. 178 
 84 
Lenin: A Political Life 
Revolutionary wars could be anticipated as the struggle between 
socialism and capitalism intensified. The rise of the Third International 
and the demise of the Kautskyite 'centrists' was forecast. 179 The 
programme sketched out several tasks 'in the general political area'. 
The Soviet state had purportedly led the way in legislating for 'a higher 
form of democratism'. No apology was made for depriving the middle 
class of its political rights. The Programme maintained that the civic 
freedoms offered to workers by certain capitalist states were more 
formal than real. 'Proletarian democracy' was supposedly different. 180 
Attention was drawn to the recallability of soviet deputies as well as in 
the abolition of the division of legislative and executive authorities. The 
priority, in Lenin's words, was to 'attain a further rapprochement of 
the organs of power with the labouring masses'. 181 This was all 
confident stuff (which the commission, on Bukharin's suggestion, had 
asked Lenin to insert in the draft). 182 Yet it was pragmatic too: the 
programme emphasised that the 'broad masses' of the population did 
not match the urban factory workers in their cultural level and 
revolutionary preparedness. Since a shortage of working-class admin-
istrators persisted, the retention of the 'specialists' from the regimes of 
Nikolai II and Aleksandr Kerenski was essential. 'A partial rebirth of 
bureaucratism' had resulted. 183 But an eventual solution would be 
obtained through 'the gradual attraction of every single member of the 
entire labouring population into work in the administration of the 
state' .184 
Both the Congress commission and the Congress had few objections 
until they examined the clauses on the 'national question'. The rights of 
national self-determination and secession, which Lenin had demanded, 
were obfuscated in the final version: this was the single major defeat he 
suffered in the discussions on the party programme. 185 But his efforts 
ensured that the programme was not without potential appeal to the 
non-Russian peoples, even if Marxist jargon was used: 'Proletarians 
and semi-proletarians of the various nationalities' were to be drawn 
into collaborative activities. 'The national feelings of the labouring 
masses' were to be respected. No nation should have privileged status 
over the others. 186 The constitutional arrangement to be made at the 
end of the Civil War was to be a 'federative unification of states 
organised according to the Soviet type'. 187 
Sections on military, judicial, educational and religious policy 
followed. Lenin's original draft had been written in the heat of the 
controversy between Trotski and the Military Opposition, and had 
avoided mention of the Red Army. 188 The Congress commission, 
 Only One Year 
85 
however, insisted on titling the gap at least in general terms. A clause 
was inserted on the need to encourage the promotion of workers and 
peasants to positions of command. The abolition of the elective 
principle in the armed forces was also defended. 189 The judicial section 
was more uplifting, prescribing that delinquents should henceforward 
be punished not by loss of liberty but by public dishonour and 
compulsory labour on behalf of society. On the other hand, legal 
procedures were scoffed at. Where the necessary decrees were not in 
place, judges should simply be 'guided by a socialist consciousness of 
justice'.l90 In education, the programme called for compulsory, free 
schooling for all children through to seventeen years. Facilities were to 
be made available to adults who had not been to school. 191 Religious 
training was to be banned from educational premises and the party was 
to campaign for 'the complete withering away of religious prejudices'. 
But this was to be handled sensitively lest persecution of believers 
should increase religious fanaticism. 192 Lenin managed to effect a blend 
of clear intention and reassuring rhetoric which he had failed to obtain 
on the national question. The programme's principal objective was the 
creation of a society of highly literate and publicly active citizens. 
The economic section was more detailed than the others. Lenin 
aimed at 'the maximum unification of the entire economic life of the 
country in accordance with a single state plan'. This would involve 'the 
greatest centralisation of production' and the inducement of small-
scale artisanal enterprises to form bigger and bigger conglomerates. 
The transformation was to be entrusted primarily to the trade unions, 
whose functions would move from the traditional defence of ordinary 
workers towards control over production. Thus 'a struggle against the 
bureaucratisation of the economic apparatus of Soviet power' would 
be waged. Central planning was repeatedly insisted upon, and the 
mobilisation of every man and woman capable of work was to be 
undertaken. 193 
A steep rise in productivity was projected. This would necessitate 
'systematic work on the re-education of the masses' and 'the creation of 
a new socialist discipline'. Shortage of managerial talent would be a 
temporary disadvantage. The party would need to employ 'specialists', 
who had abandoned organised sabotage against the regime, for the 
foreseeable future; ultra-radical proposals to sack them were to be 
rejected. The immediate introduction of 'full communism', implement-
ing the principle of 'to each according to his needs', was not possible; 
only the first steps away from capitalism could be undertaken. 194 
Nowhere was this more obvious than in agriculture. The programme 
 86 
Lenin: A Political Life 
boasted that 'large-scale socialist' fanning had begun; but there was 
still a long way to go before socialism would underpin the agrarian 
sector. The priority in the short term would be to reform the peasant 
land communes by getting rid of strip-field allotments, supplying 
improved seed-stocks and increasing agronomic assistance. No mercy 
would be shown to the kulaks. Their resistance to the government's 
policies would be suppressed and the campaign would be continued 
against their 'exploitative impulses'. Meanwhile the middle peasants 
would be courted so as to bring about their 'steady and planned 
involvement in the work of socialist construction'. The programme 
specified that the current breakdown in trade between town and 
countryside, which had brought the country close to destruction, 
exemplified the need for general economic and cultural differences 
between urban and rural conditions to be eliminated.195 
Trade, too, had to be subjected to state planning and direction; and 
all citizens were to belong to 'consumer communes' so that the 
distribution of goods could be accomplished with efficiency. Co-
operatives should be transformed into agencies for 'communist 
development'. Banking was to be monopolised by the state and 
turned gradually into 'a central accountancy for communist society'. In 
the longer term, money would fall into desuetude and the state budget 
would become the budget for the entire economy of the country. 196 
A range of social reforms was projected. A massive housebuilding 
scheme was announced to banish cramped and insanitary conditions 
from the scene. The eight-hour working day was to be reduced in the 
case of miners and others doing dangerous jobs to six hours. Greater 
protection for women at work was anticipated. Unemployment was to 
be eliminated. Nevertheless child labour ought to be abolished 
immediately. An inspectorate to be established to supervise the 
implementation of all governmental decrees. 197 Universal free health-
care was promised. Campaigns against alcoholism and venereal disease 
were to be launched. Thus an inspiriting vista of projects was sketched. 
Blame for delays and reverses was placed directly upon the effects of 
the Great War and the Civil War. Capitalism was blamed for the 
outbreak of both. Yet the word went forth. The Soviet regime begged 
for the support of the so-called labouring masses. Workers and poor 
peasants were to be the major future builders of socialism as well as the 
major beneficiaries. Capitalism's demise throughout Europe was at 
hand. Lenin had produced a programme reflecting the grand designs of 
a Bolshevism which, put on the rack of the Civil War, lifted its eyes to 
the future tasks of peacetime. The renovation of society in entirely 
 Only One Year 
87 
reconstructed material circumstances was anticipated. Communism 
was glimpsed on the horizon. 
The fudgings of the party programme should not go unremarked. 
No reference to the one-party state, to the Red Terror, to the Cheka, to 
the imposition of a uniform official ideology, the persecution of other 
political parties, to the forced-labour concentration camps. The bland 
picture of law-breakers being shamed in public but not losing their 
liberty was offensively at variance with reality. Not only current 
practice but also intentions were slurred over. Policy on the national 
question was portentously grand and extremely vague. Similarly, the 
objective of influencing the middle peasants by persuasion rather than 
by force was stated without indicating what would happen if 
persuasion failed. Throughout the programme there are fine general 
goals but little specification. 
Grim passages also are impressive. Throughout the programme there 
was praise of 'the dictatorship of the proletariat' and scorn for any 
form of socialism hostile to it. Eulogies of revolutionary justice, 
allowing the Bolsheviks and their supporters to feel unrestricted even 
by their own legislation, marked out a strategy for the party in the 
post-war epoch. Lenin wanted to show confidence in the durability of 
the Soviet regime in Russia and the surrounding regions. Mass 
participation in administration would be encouraged, and the 
participants would be enlisted in the struggle for socialism. If there is 
a single word that dominates the programme, it is struggle. Class 
struggle, struggle against the counter-revolution, struggle with 
imperialism. The state, increasingly run by the so-called masses, was 
to make its role all-pervasive. It was to direct industry, agriculture and 
commerce in the transition towards a communist framework of life. 
Bulwarks against the deployment of power in a manner undesirable 
even to the Bolshevik party are considered still more casually than in 
Lenin's The State and Revolution. The division of powers between 
legislative, executive and judicial arms of government is crudely 
mocked. Such maladministration as existed is attributed to officials 
from the pre-October period with a petty-bourgeois mentality. The 
dominance of the state, extruding all other forms of influence on public 
life, is recommended by Lenin and his colleagues in a spirit tantamount 
to the nightmare entertained in Thomas Hobbes's Leviathan. 
