 7 The Rifle and Sickle 
DEVELOPING THE NEW ECONOMIC POLICY 
There are many examples in history of governments embarking on 
reforms without intuition about the potential repercussions. Often a 
relentless process is begun. It is doubtful that Henry VIII anticipated 
the full consequences of disestablishing the pope's power over the 
Church in England. Even Martin Luther was unaware of the 
ecclesiastical revolution he was unleashing when calling for the 
papacy's transformation. 
When Lenin's party introduced a grain tax and permitted the trade 
in surplus stocks held by peasants, however, no such illusions 
prevailed. The Bolsheviks were Marxists; they also had come through 
a Civil War which, in their estimation, had been won by measures on 
production and distribution which had marked a movement towards 
socialism. No Bolshevik leader regarded the New Economic Policy (as 
Lenin started to call it from May 1921)1 as anything other than a 
retreat forced upon the party by the peasantry's discontent. The genie 
of capitalism had been released back into the economy. Every Central 
Committee member approved this with reluctance, taking it for granted 
that a resurgence of private commerce would strengthen the social 
forces in the country hostile to the Bolsheviks. Karl Marx's Das Kapital 
had taught them that, where economics lead, politics eventuatty follow. 
Having defeated the bourgeoisie by force of arms after the October 
Revolution, they were deeply annoyed that capitalist tendencies would 
rise up again in peacetime. Unease and irritation were expressed in 
dozens of written queries passed up to Lenin at the Tenth Party 
Congress. The Congress's resolution, while breaking with forcible grain 
requisitioning, was indefinite on many significant details. What was to 
be done about industry, about artisanal workshop, about co-
operatives, about sowing quotas?2 Well as he had managed the 
Congress, Lenin had also had much luck. The revolt of the Kronstadt 
sailors during the Tenth Party Congress prevented the irritation from 
being manifested in too unruly a fashion; the incentive to ratty around 
the Central Committee was irresistible. 
185 
 186 
Lenin: A Political Life 
The Central Committee and its PoJitburo would have to elucidate its 
poJicy rapidly if an impact on the opinion of the peasantry was to be 
made before the spring sowing. The party's organs rather than 
Sovnarkom or its various adjuncts took virtually all the major 
decisions on the New Economic PoJicy. A Central Committee plenum 
met on the Congress's last day, and appointed the new Politburo. 
Lenin, Kamenev, Stalin and Trotski kept their places; but Krestinski, 
who no longer had a seat in the Central Committee, gave way to 
Zinoviev. Vyacheslav Molotov was to lead the Secretariat together 
with V. M. 
Mikhailov and E. M. Yaroslavski.3 None of these, 
however, was appointed to the Central Committee's commission, to 
be chaired by V. P. Milyutin, for the elaboration of official measures.4 
Lenin did not want to be identified as the sole architect of the reform 
which, from May 1921, was regularly known as the New Economic 
PoJicy. Connoisseurs of his style were able to recall that in 1918, despite 
having being the protagonist of a separate peace treaty with Germany 
and Austria-Hungary, he insisted that others in the Bolshevik party 
leadership should go out to Brest-Litovsk to do the signing. Certainly 
he could plead pre-occupation with other business which was being 
reported to him: the Anglo-Soviet negotiations; the Kronstadt and 
Tambov revolts; the attempted seizure of power in Berlin by the 
German Communist Party with their 'March Action'; the worsening 
conflicts in the Soviet trade union leadership; industrial strikes in 
Soviet Russia; dissent in the Bolshevik party; the activities of the 
Mensheviks and Socialist Revolutionaries; the establishment of 'Soviet 
power' in the Transcaucasus. Even so, the choice of priorities for his 
close participation was his prerogative. He wished to ensure that the 
entire Central Committee was responsible to the New Economic 
Policy. Milyutin, moreover, had taken his side in the pre-Congress 
discussions: the drafting details could safely be left to him. In the mean 
time pressure was put upon the commission to work fast. Milyutin 
could build on the drafting already done in the Politburo, Central 
Committee and Congress; and, after showing his project to Kamenev 
and Tsyurupa for their comments, he was able to come before the fully-
attended meeting of the Politburo on 18 March. 5 
Lenin was in the chair.6 The Politburo wanted further changes to be 
made to Milyutin's draft. In particular, the meeting- undoubtedly with 
Lenin's approval - demanded that the new tax would be levied on 
individual households, not on whole communes. In addition, the draft 
was to be modified so as to specify that 'local exchange' would involve 
the re-opening of the old bazaars and markets.7 Thus commenced the 
 The Rifle and the Sickle 
187 
broadening of the contents and language of reform which continued 
through the rest of the year. Dread terms like 'markets' had previously 
been avoided. 
On J 9 March the Politburo looked at a manifesto to be directed at 
the peasants. It was a masterpiece of political appeal, promising the 
permanent removal of landlordism and expressing regret that grain 
requisitioning had been made necessary in the Civil War. The 
manifesto committed the government to buying industrial products 
abroad so that it would be worthwhile for the peasantry to maximise 
their sown area in anticipation of trading it later in the year. The grain 
tax, moreover, would be set at a lower level than the wartime 
requisitioning target; and, while the poor peasants were guaranteed 
continued material support, the manifesto assured the rest of the 
peasantry that efforts to increase harvest would be rewarded. The fiscal 
level would be announced before the sowing.8 Only at this stage did the 
central party leadership make its intentions fully public. The central 
party apparatus had deliberated secretly before the Congress, and 
occasional articles in Pravda had indicated what was afoot. The 
Congress had ratified the general proposal for reform. The central 
party apparatus had scrutinised and sanctioned the details. Only when 
this process had been completed was either the Central Executive 
Committee of the Congress of Soviets or Sovnarkom involved. The 
party monopolised power not only in theory but also in reality; the 
supreme issue on the agenda of Soviet politics was not to be devolved 
to the formal state authorities until policy had been fixed by the 
Bolshevik leadership. 
Then the legislation came thick and fast. Mikhail Kalinin presented 
the Politburo-approved decree to the Central Executive Committee of 
the Congress of Soviets on 21 March.9 The original plan for Lenin and 
Kalinin to do this jointly was discreetly dropped. 10 Lenin was staying 
out of the highlight. He also kept back from belonging to the party's 
new commission on the grain tax set up by the Politburo on 25 March. 
Instead the commission's chairman was to be Kamenev. 11 Further vital 
decisions were recommended by its members. The aim was for state 
bodies to procure between 300 and 350 million puds of grain through 
the tax. 12 This would not include the Ukrainian harvest. In fact the 
commission resolved to maintain wartime-style requisitioning in 
Ukraine. 13 
Thus the potential region of greatest grain surplus in the Soviet-ruled 
republics was to be exempted from Lenin's reform. The antagonism of 
the Ukraine-based Bolshevik leadership, already expressed at the Tenth 
 188 
Lenin: A Political Life 
Party Congress, may have had an influence; 14 but probably Kamenev 
and his colleagues- with Lenin in agreement in the background- were 
themselves worried about a resurgence of Ukrainian private trade 
before the completion of the transfer of land from gentry and rich 
peasants. The Ukrainian agrarian revolution was in an early stage. The 
Bolshevik party's fear of kulak-led resistance to its authority was so 
strong that even the Ukrainian equivalent of the committees of the 
village poor, abolished in Russia in December 1918, remained in 
existence until the mid-1920s. 15 The Politburo generally accepted 
Kamenev's recommendations. The sole objection was made to the level 
set for the grain tax outside the Ukraine: further consultation led to its 
reduction to 240 million puds of grain. 16 The commission was divided 
over the question of extending trading rights to urban retailers. 
Bolshevik leaders before and during the Party Congress had considered 
ideas on reform limited to bartering between the peasant producer and 
both the state procurer and the individual consumer; private traders 
had not been envisaged. The Central Committee discussed the division 
in the commission, and ruled in favour of those who wanted to allow a 
private retail trade. 17 An important linguistic modification was also 
made. The words 'buying and selling' were affirmed as being words for 
the party to popularise (even though the Politburo also intended to 
punish any peasant found to have sold more grain than would allow 
him to sow enough in the spring).t 8 
Still Lenin kept his head down. It was another of the party's agrarian 
specialists, V. V. Kuraev, who wrote bluntly in Pravda on 27 March 
192l:'We must review all questions of our agrarian, peasant policy'.t9 
Not until early May 1921 did he given a lengthy printed exposition of 
his views.20 Lenin, a more than willing public speaker in normal times, 
delivered only four speeches in the ten weeks after the Party Congress. 
Just one of these, which was a report to a meeting of party secretaries 
in Moscow province, focussed upon the New Economic Policy.21 
Distraction by other governmental business can hardly explain his 
avoidance of the topic. Lenin was lying low. 
Yet behind the scenes he was deeply involved in official decisions, 
chairing both Politburo and Sovnarkom.22 Sovnarkom continued to 
oversee the arrangements for the sowing committees;23 and Red Army 
units, including cavalry, were deployed to ensure that the sown area 
reached a maximum. 24 Furthermore, the decision to set the tax level as 
low as 240 million puds of grain did not solve the difficulties of fiscal 
planning. There was conflict between the People's Commissariat of 
Food Supplies and the Central Statistical Administration in the 
 The Rifle and the Sickle 
189 
estimation of the grainstocks available; and Lenin, with his expertise in 
the geography of agriculture going back to his 1899 book The 
Development of Capitalism in Russia, was naturally drawn into 
arbitrating.2s Much of this effort was guess-work; for the statistics of 
both sides were chaotic and unreliable. The result could be horrendous 
for particular provinces. V. A. Antonov-Ovseenko, sent by the 
Politburo as political commissar to suppress the Tambov peasant 
revolt, wrote to Lenin in alarm at the quota assigned to the local 
authorities.26 The Volga region was the major source of grain as 
identified by the Politburo in its discussions.27 The reform was 
therefore still a tremendous gamble by Lenin; it might cause more 
problems than it solved. As yet it was restricted to commerce and 
taxation. Nothing was yet intended to alter the government's 
programme on industry, finance, transport, management, labour and 
planning. The focus remained on the countryside. 
It was a self-limitation which could not long endure. The economy 
was collapsing. Lenin, in the sole speech to the Moscow party 
secretaries, reported his own astonishment at a report he had received 
from comrade Korolev which revealed that, in Ivanovo-Voznesensk 
province, 'no more than six factories have been working and not one of 
these work continuously for a whole month'.28 Inflation was steep and 
getting steeper. Food supplies were still below the necessary minimum 
for subsistence in most towns and cities, and early indications about 
the forthcoming harvest were not encouraging. Factory production in 
1921 was a fifth of the total registered before the Great War. Coal 
output fell to 31 per cent, steel to four per cent, pig iron to three per 
cent. Transport remained in crisis: only three tenths of the pre-war 
freight load was carried in 1920-1921.29 In these circumstances the 
New Economic Policy would rapidly have to be expanded if the Soviet 
authorities were to extricate themselves from disaster. 
CONQUEST OF EMPIRE 
At the Tenth Party Congress and subsequently Lenin had demanded a 
union between workers and peasants. And yet his private thoughts 
were not so kindly about the peasantry. His first plan for the speech to 
the Party Congress on agrarian reform in March 1921 assumed that a 
'peasant counter-revolution' was occurring against Bolshevism.30 He 
could not say this at the Congress without casting a shadow on the 
party's claim to be defending the interests of the mass of the 
 190 
Lenin: A Political Life 
population. He even jotted down a reminder to himself to 'gloss over in 
the press "the interrelationships of the proletariat and the peasan-
try'".31 But his predominant intention was to suppress revolts in the 
villages. Gentle towards the peasants he met, Lenin was brutal in his 
dispensations of policy. 
His frantic supervision of military actions, no less than the 
discussions in the Politburo about the development of economic 
policy, distracted him from considering what kind of constitutional 
settlement should follow the ending of the Civil War. By far the 
greatest proportion of the lands of the Romanovs had been 
reconquered; but the precise relations to be established among the 
several Soviet republics, including Russia, had yet to be decided. 
Repression was at its most intense in the grain-producing areas of 
Russia. Mikhail Tukhachevski was recalled from the Western front 
against Poland to conduct operations against the peasants of Tambov 
province. Simultaneously troops were assembled for assaults on rebels 
elsewhere in the Volga region, western Siberia, Ukraine and the 
southern Russian provinces on the Russo-Ukrainian border.32 Lenin 
was deeply involved. A Politburo session under his chairmanship 
instructed E. M. Sklyanski, Trotski's deputy, to put pressure on the 
Red high command to get on with the task of 'suppressing 
banditism'.33 The ruthlessness anticipated by Lenin at the Tenth 
Party Congress was repeatedly requested. In this tense situation no 
quarter would be offered to the Mensheviks and Socialist Revolution-
aries. Any of their leaders discovered in Moscow and Petro grad were to 
be arrested on sight; the fitful existence allowed to their parties in the 
Civil War was to be terminated.34 Nor should any trace of the 
Kronstadt mutiny be allowed to endure. The most prominent 
mutineers were shot, and thousands of ordinary sailors were to be 
transferred to a 'disciplinary colony' whence few returned.35 Propa-
ganda would, Lenin hoped, eventually redress the discredit into which 
the Bolshevik regime had fallen. But force was the key to survival. First 
suppression, then economic reform. 
The violence applied in the Volga region was paralleled in areas of 
non-Russian populations. A revolt of Bashkirs had occurred in May 
1920. Azeris, too, had risen against the Bolsheviks in the same month; 
and the Politburo discussed the weakness of the party's power in Baku 
well into 1921.36 Armenians had followed the Azeri example in 
February 1921. And the Georgians, who were the most recently-
conquered nation of the Transcaucaus, simmered with disaffection 
from the authorities imposed by the Red Army under Sergo 
 The Rifle and the Sickle 
191 
Ordzhonikidze. In central Asia a revolt burst out among Moslems 
who rallied to rebels known as the Basmachis. 37 The Bolsheviks had 
alienated the non-Russians to a lesser extent than had the Whites in 
previous years; but this led no party leader to think that the 'national 
question' had been solved. On the contrary, the lands of the former 
Russian empire were seething with political unrest among the various 
nations and ethnic groups. Debate had sooner or later to be joined 
about the entire constitutional settlement to be imposed. 
There was an assumption in the Politburo that some kind of 
federalism was required. But how this would be realised was undecided. 
The conquest of the Transcaucasus had meant that the Russian 
Socialist Federal Soviet Republic (or RSFSR), Ukraine and Belorussia 
were joined as independent Soviet republics by Azerbaidzhan, Armenia 
and Georgia. Bilateral treaties were signed between the RSFSR and the 
three new republics across the Caucasus mountains along the lines 
already established with the others.38 But the preferred long-term ties 
among all six Soviet republics were not specified. In December 1920, 
when the latest treaty had been signed between Russia and Ukraine, 
'federal' was struck from the draft describing the Russo-Ukrainian 
relationship. 39 Almost certainly the temporising was caused by 
disagreements among central party leaders. Already in June there 
had been a spat between Lenin and Stalin.40 Lenin wished to form a 
federation of Russia, Ukraine and other republics whereas Stalin 
wanted to incorporate these other republics in the RSFSR with rights 
of 'autonomy' of the type inaugurated with the Bashkir Republic in 
1919. Several such republics were established within the RSFSR. The 
largest by far was the Turkestan Republic (which was at the centre of 
the revolt of the Basmachi). To treat Ukraine in such a way, according 
to Lenin was 'chauvinism'.41 Russia and its Bolshevik leaders had to go 
out of their way to demonstrate their anti-nationalist credentials; and 
he was annoyed that his nearest major ally in the party on these 
questions had turned against him. 
The dispute had ramifications for policy throughout Europe. For 
Lenin, the addition of Ukraine to a federal multinational state would 
merely have been the prelude to the additions of Poland and Germany. 
In midsummer I 920 this had been a matter of urgent policymaking as 
the Red Army prepared itself to march on Warsaw. For Stalin, this was 
naive inasmuch as neither the Poles nor the Germans would 'ever enter 
a federation on the principle of the rights of Ukraine'.42 There were 
further possible distinctions here. Perhaps Stalin, unlike Lenin, was 
also aiming to have as strong and large an RSFSR as possible so as to 
 192 
Lenin: A Political Life 
act as a counterweight to a future Soviet Germany; but Lenin the 
Russian was less Russocentric than Stalin the Georgian, and he was 
apparently untroubled about a Soviet federation in Central and 
Eastern Europe which might not be dominated by Russia. 
Stalin was difficult to face down. His expertise was beyond question. 
He remained People's Commissar for Nationality Affairs, despite 
demanding to resign on 24 November 1921, and had been used by the 
Politburo to supervise decisions about the borderlands in general and 
the Transcaucasus in particular during the Civil War.43 In previous 
debates on the 'national question', moreover, Lenin had met intense 
opposition from the party on the grounds that he excessively indulged 
nationalist opinion.44 Stalin himself had been criticised for this at the 
Tenth Party Congress.45 Lenin could not count on defeating Stalin's 
constitutional project in open party debate. For the while neither man 
wanted such a debate, and their disagreement was kept secret in the 
central party leadership. There was anyway much consensus between 
them. Their ideas on federalism were confined to the governmental 
institutions. Both continued to insist upon a strictly centralised, unitary 
party. The Central Committee, its Politburo and its Orgburo in 
Moscow were to instruct and control all party bodies throughout the 
republics, and these 'local' bodies were to direct the republican 
governments as Moscow demanded. A tacit understanding therefore 
emerged between Lenin and Stalin that other more pressing matters of 
politics and economy should engage their attention: the fractiousness 
of the 'trade union controversy' was considered an ill-affordable 
luxury. 
Not that the affairs of the non-Russian nationalities were overlooked 
by Lenin. He was especially solicitous about events in the Transcau-
casus, and on 3 March 1921 had instructed Ordzhonikidze to avoid 
simply repeating what had been done in Russia since the October 
Revolution. The region's peculiarities had to be taken into account. 
Initially Lenin, the lifelong harrier of the Mensheviks, advocated the 
quest of 'an acceptable compromise' with the Georgian Menshevik 
leader Noi Zhordania. 46 Ordzhonikidze and fellow members of the 
Caucasian Bureau (or Kavburo) in Tbilisi must have blinked when 
reading the telegram. Such advice from Moscow at a time when the 
Russian Mensheviks were being thrown into the prisons of the Cheka! 
Lenin had changed his mind about Zhordania, and continued to 
restrain the Kavburo. On 14 April 1921 he sent an open letter to 'the 
communist comrades of Azerbaidzhan, Armenia, Georgia, Dagestan 
and the Mountain Republic' demanding that local conditions be 
 The Rifle and the Sickle 
193 
respected. A 'slower, more cautious and more systematic transition to 
socialism', according to Lenin, should be undertaken than in Russia. 
His reasoning was not just that the region was predominantly agrarian 
or that Bolshevik rule was under threat. He also asserted that the 
Transcaucasus could act as a conduit for trade between the Soviet 
republics and the West. Foreign concessionnaires should be welcomed. 
In this direction he was in favour of the creation of 'a tight union' 
among the peoples of the region.47 Neither Stalin nor Ordzhonikidze 
was pleased to be tolerant to their native country. A tightly unified 
Transcaucasus unquestionably appealed to them. Ordzhonikidze 
secured a single regional transport policy and interfered in a variety 
of matters relating to foreign trade. He re-shuffled personnel, making 
use of party activists sent to him by Stalin and the Orgburo in Moscow. 
His appearance on a white horse in Tbilisi was thought offensive: 
Ordzhonikidze ruled, and liked to be seen to rule; and he was as 
infuriated as Stalin himself in July I 921 when Stalin, on a rare visit to 
Georgia, was heckled at a public meeting.48 The rest of the central 
party leadership, too, wanted to hold the republics of the Transcau-
casus to heel. On 3 April 1921 a Politburo decision was taken to require 
them to submit any treaties with Turkey to Moscow before 
ratification.49 Their formal independence must not go their heads. 
Thus it came about that Ordzhonikidze, with Stalin's full support, 
sought to reinforce control over each republic by constraining them 
within a Transcaucasian Federation. In August 1921 this became the 
official policy of the party's Kavburo. so 
The Transcaucasian Federation idea had the Central Committee's 
support and was due to come before the Politburo on 29 November. 
Lenin backed it in principle, yet deemed implementation premature. He 
wished to restrain the Kavburo, and proposed that further discussions 
be undertaken with party members and 'the worker and peasant 
masses' in the region. Even Lenin envisaged that the discussions would 
last no longer than 'several weeks' (and he was persuaded by Stalin that 
this could safely be re-phrased as 'a certain period of time').s 1 The 
Politburo approved the proposal despite a furious objection by Budu 
Mdivani on behalf of the Georgian Central Committee. 52 The feet were 
cut from beneath him by the device of getting a far from reluctant A. F. 
Myasnikyan, who had a leading role in the Armenian Bolshevik 
leadership, to appear at the Ninth All-Russian Congress of Soviets in 
December 1921 to demand the Transcaucasian Federation's creation. 53 
Still there was no deliberation as to the permanent arrangements to 
be made among the RSFSR, Ukraine, Belorussia and the proposed 
 194 
Lenin: A Political Life 
Transcaucasian Federation. Stalin wrote to Lenin on 13 January 1922 
repeating his commitment to the incorporation of all of them within 
the RSFSR. But he denied wanting to do this quickly. It was certain 
unnamed comrades, according to Stalin, who demanded immediate 
action. 54 Whether he was being disingenuous is uncertain. Possibly he 
was content to see the Transcaucasian Federation, which was 
promulgated despite Georgian Bolshevik resistance on 12 March, 
come into existence before moving on to a grander constitutional 
project. Complaints from Georgia continued to reach Moscow, and the 
problems of other republics did not cease. Clashes between the Central 
Committee in Moscow and the Bolshevik politicians of Ukraine had 
occurred since 1918. In a memorable rebuke, Stalin after the Brest-
Litovsk treaty had told V. P. Zatonski to stop 'playing at govern-
ments'.55 Not all the holders of power in Kiev were ethnic Ukrainians. 
Christian Rakovski, a Bulgarian, and Mikhail Frunze, a part 
Romanian, were as determined to keep the Central Committee at 
bay as were natives of the republic such as Mikola Skrypnik. The 
attempt by Moscow to break up Ukraine into separate economic areas 
was resented. 56 On 11 March 1922 the Ukrainian Politburo complained 
to the Central Committee in Moscow about a series of infringements of 
the republic's rights as embodied in the treaty with the RSFSR.57 This 
republic, great in industry and agriculture, was always a source of 
worry for the Bolshevik party. The Politburo repudiated the complaint; 
but Frunze still placed it on the Politburo agenda on 11 May 1922. A 
commission was established under Frunze's chairmanship to offer 
recommendations on the future relations between Ukraine and the 
RSFSR.58 
Stalin resented this interference. He was not only an avid centraliser 
who imposed Moscow's policies on the peripheral regions; he was also 
the leader most often called upon by Moscow to mediate in conflicts 
between one region and another. The spats over the territorial limits of 
Bashkiria in 1919 were followed by several others within the RSFSR; 
and, most notoriously, a menacing disturbance broke out between the 
Azerbaidzhani and Armenian Soviet republics over the ownership of 
Nagorny Karabakh. In 1920 the Politburo had ruled in favour of 
Armenia, but in 1921 Nagorny Karabakh - despite being heavily 
populated by Armenians- was handed to Azerbaidzhan.59 
Sooner or later, however, Stalin and Lenin would clash over Stalin's 
project for 'autonomisation'. Stalin obviously felt that reason was on 
his side. At that time he was not the harrier of the non-Russian 
nationalities he became in the 1930s. He supported the use of native-
 The Rifle and the Sickle 
195 
language schooling and fostered local cultural development. He 
promoted non-Russian Bolsheviks to high office. He spoke against 
privileges enjoyed by any one nation.60 Furthermore, his duties as 
People's Commissar for Nationality Affairs left him in no doubt how 
frail the Bolshevik party was in the non-Russian republics. Bolsheviks 
were few in number, were usually disproportionately drawn from 
ethnic Russians as well as from persons who had joined the party late 
in the Civil War.61 The arguments for letting republican Bolshevik 
organisations take full charge of their respective republics were not self-
evident. To Stalin it must have seemed that Lenin had not thought out 
a responsible party policy. Lenin had been proved wrong before in 
Stalin's eyes. Until 1917 he had claimed it possible to run a great 
multinational state without the recognition of one language for state 
business. He had also promised to offer the right of secession to non-
Russians. In 1920 he had underestimated the nationalism of the 
Poles.62 Stalin knew that his convalescent colleague would been 
annoyed by the autonomisation project; but he expected that 
eventually he would concede ground just as had happened over the 
Transcaucasian Federation. The will to retain the peoples of the Soviet 
lands subject to the party's power and policies, by force if the need 
arose, was common to both men. Stalin was therefore unprepared for 
the intensity of Lenin's hostility when it revealed itself from autumn 
1922. 
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS 
Both Lenin and Stalin at any rate knew that the 'national question' was 
inseparably linked to issues of foreign policy. In September 1920 the 
Congress of Peoples of the East had been organised so as to advertise 
the virtues of the treatment of non-Russians in the Russian Socialist 
Federal Soviet Republic to the rest of the world; and in the discussions 
of 1921-1922 the argument was put, especially by Christian Rakovsky, 
that exemplary tolerance should be shown by the Central Committee 
towards the various Soviet republics so as to make Bolshevism an 
attractive alternative in the eyes of national minorities in the states 
established in eastern Europe since the treaty of Versailles.63 The 
linkage with the same question was perceptible also with the 
development of policy on 'concessions'. The introduction of American 
 196 
Lenin: A Political Life 
oil companies, if it occurred, would result in the handing over of 
virtually all large-scale Azerbaidzhani industry to the mercy of foreign 
capitalism. 64 
The Politburo was perplexed as to how to develop a line which 
would simultaneously enhance territorial security, facilitate the spread 
of socialist revolutions and attract investment from foreign capitalists. 
The defeat at the battle of the Vistula had led to a revision of foreign 
policy. Lenin rightly believed that, however successful they were with 
these important but lesser states, it would be progress with the Allies 
that would determine the Soviet regime's survival. Yet this attitude 
exaggerated the control exerted by the British, French and Americans 
over the countries bordering on the former Russian empire, but not to 
the point that it was entirely ludicrous. Lenin had hopes for a 
rapprochement with the USA, and such was his gullibility that he was 
tricked by a commercial mountebank called Vanderlip who claimed 
that, if granted the timber concession in Kamchatka in the Far East, he 
would guarantee that the American administration would take a pro-
Soviet orientation.6s About the French, who were owed vast sums of 
money since before the October Revolution, Lenin harboured no 
illusions. The greatest diplomatic effort was put into a resumption of 
trade links with the British. Lev Kamenev had spent several weeks in 
London in 1920 - not always to the best diplomatic effect: his call on 
the Mile End Road for the arming of English workers disconcerted 
Lenin almost as much as it infuriated Lloyd George.66 Nevertheless the 
British cabinet took a benign view and, despite further disagreements, 
the negotiating process went well; and Lenin looked forward to adding 
the United Kingdom to the smaller states of the Baltic as his country's 
trading partners. Not only two-way commerce but also an inflow of 
foreign investment through concessionaires were his stated objectives.67 
Lenin also knew that nothing could be counted upon in advance. In 
public he had argued, on 6 December 1920, that Russian participation 
in world trade was necessary for economic recovery everywhere.68 
Whether he believed this is doubtful. In the 1890s, let us recall, his 
economic works denied that the capitalist industrial development of a 
large country crucially depends upon its access to all world markets; 
and such a position would hardly have led him to contend that Russian 
raw materials were absolutely indispensable for the United Kingdom 
with its huge overseas empire.69 Nor did he give up the hope that 
'world revolution' would come to the rescue of the RSFSR and the 
allied Soviet republics; indeed no assertion of this possibility was made 
by him between the Tenth Party Congress and the end of 1921.70 
 The Rifle and the Sickle 
197 
This emphasis was strengthened by the failure of the 'March Action' 
undertaken by the German Communist Party, on the initiative of Bela 
Kun and other representatives of the Communist International, to 
overthrow the elected German government and seize power in the last 
week of March 1921.71 Paul Levi had questioned this strategy, but 
difficulties with his comrades led to his resignation from the German 
communist leadership. The March Action was swiftly suppressed by 
army and police in Berlin. The planning behind the fiasco was minimal. 
Bukharin sympathised with the German communists; but, inside the 
Executive Committee of the Communist International, it was almost 
certainly Grigori Zinoviev who gave official sanction to Kun's activity. 
Zinoviev suffered the embarrassment of having 'black-legged' against 
the Bolshevik party in the October Revolution; he over-compensated 
for this in the Communist International by zeal for foreign socialist 
adventures (which may also explain the roisterings of his fellow alleged 
black-leg Kamenev in London in 1920). Levi excoriated the Action, 
and was expelled from the German Communist Party.72 At the time 
Lenin did not comment. Nor is there much evidence that he was 
involved in the Communist International's decision. Lenin's diary in 
March was filled with considerations about the tax in kind, the 
Georgian operation, the Kronstadt and Tambov revolts, the arrange-
ment of foreign concessions, the trade treaties, the Tenth Party 
Congress. Even if he were to be shown to have known in advance about 
the Action in Berlin, he evidently was not its long-range supervisor. 
The episode shows how even Lenin did not control his colleagues 
over all policies. By his own estimation, socialist revolution in 
Germany was a prerequisite for the full achievement of socialism in 
Russia. Equally Lenin's political distance from the March Action 
demonstrates the intensity of his pre-occupation with the multifaceted 
crisis confronting the Soviet state. Survival, not expansion, was his 
current priority. He subsequently refrained from criticising Zinoviev, 
Radek and the German leaders over their blunders, but notably also 
failed to endorse them. At any rate, his behaviour towards Germany in 
the rest of the year concentrated more on trade with the German 
bourgeoisie than on the revolutionary potential of the German 
proletariat. 
On the last day of the Tenth Party Congress, on 16 March, an 
Anglo-Russian Trade Agreement was signed in London. Both a 
Soviet-Turkish treaty and a Soviet-Persian treaty came into effect in 
the same month, and a provisional trade agreement was made with 
Germany on 6 May.73 The search for concessionaires was paramount. 
 198 
Lenin: A Political Life 
Undeterred by the dispute about Baku and Grozny oil, Lenin pushed 
for east Ukrainian coal as a further possible concession. 'It is ultra-
desirable,' he wrote to Trotski, 'to give up a quarter of the Don bass ( + 
Krivoi Rog) to concessionaires.' The opposition, according to Lenin, 
was supposedly motivated by 'Donbass patriotism'.74 In fact the 
hostility to concessions stemmed not only from local pride but also 
from distaste for the re-introduction of large-scale capitalism from 
abroad. The basis of the New Economic Policy was found wanting by 
many party officials, activists and ordinary workers. A furious 
discussion took place at the Fourth Congress of Trade Unions in 
May 1921, and Lenin was obliged to attend to justify concessions.75 He 
was undismayed that the conditions imposed by the Soviet authorities 
upon any concessional contract were more restrictive than those 
available in other countries. Even so, he had to admit that no profitable 
concessions were brought into being in 1921 -or even, as he was later 
to note, in 1922.76 In retrospect the most successful demarche was in 
the direction of military rather than commercial co-operation. On 10 
October 1921 Lenin wrote to Trotski approvingly about the 
negotiations in progress with the German high command.77 Permis-
sion was to be granted for German forces to train and for German 
army equipment to be developed on Soviet soil; and the Red Army was 
to be involved so as to secure its own benefit. This 'commercial and 
military concession', as Lenin called it, was so useful to Berlin as a 
secret means of evading the clauses of the treaty of Versailles that it was 
retained throughout the decade.711 
This complicity with the friends of Ludendorff may be taken as 
evidence that, on balance, he was assuming that the collapse of 
Western capitalism was not imminent. Nevertheless Lenin was often 
known to play two games at once. It is equally possible that he was 
ready to be surprised. The German high command, in other words, was 
better than nothing, but the agreement would be torn up just as soon as 
the German communist leaders succeeded in emulating the October 
Revolution. But a bird in the hand was worth two in the bush. Soviet 
Russia was on the edge of the abyss. The economy was a shambles and 
the Red Army, as Trotski never failed to remind the party, required re-
training and re-equipping.79 A palliative was vital if the anticipated 
panacea was temporarily out of stock. 
Yet the central party leaders were also exercised by Marxist theory; 
the question arose about the prospects for international capitalism if 
there might be no European socialist revolution for several years. 
About the inevitability of such a revolution there was no disagreement. 
 The Rifle and the Sickle 
199 
This remained an article of faith (and perhaps also of desperation since 
a lengthy permanent absence of fraternal socialist regimes abroad was 
thought to make a crusade against Bolshevism a distinct possibility). 
Lenin unusually kept aloof from the debate among his colleagues. His 
pamphlet On The Food Tax and his subsequent speeches to the Tenth 
Party Conference, in May 1921, concentrated on domestic economics 
and politics at the expense of the international situation except insofar 
as he mentioned concessionaires.80 His proposals for Baku, Grozny, 
Don bass and Kamchatka were contentious, and he may have judged it 
unnecessary to cause further dispute by raising doubts about the 
imminence of socialist revolutions in Europe. It is just as plausible that 
he simply thought the issue to be a distraction. Lenin's favourite 
assertion that the Bolshevik party should focus on practical tasks and 
should give up its chattering carried the implication that theorising 
should be kept in the background. Certainly this is hard to square with 
his own frequent disquisitions on 'state capitalism', on Bukharin's 
philosophical position, on trade unionism under socialism.81 Yet Lenin 
frequently tried to have his cake and eat it too. But perhaps in these 
crucial months his supreme desire was to try out projects in practice 
before making hasty conclusions. The evidence about the prospects of 
the major capitalist powers was patchy and ambiguous. Lenin 
preferred to get on with government and to leave speculation to others. 
Zinoviev had no such self-restraint. In line with his encouragement 
of the March Action, he argued that capitalism was already in deep 
crisis and that the harassment of the European labour movement 
signalled the fearfulness of the European bourgeoisie.82 Bukharin was 
on Zinoviev's side, but he in turn was opposed by Trotski. 83 For 
Trotski, capitalism was achieving a certain temporary equilibrium to 
the extent that an upsurge in industrial production and trade was 
likely.84 This involved a re-jigging of political alignments. Bukharin 
had supported Trotski in the trade union controversy only to join 
Zinoviev a few months later, and Zinoviev was Trotski's perennial 
antagonist. 'Left' and 'right' were no longer easily definable terms 
among Bolsheviks. As if to prove the point, Trotski found himself 
accused of having forgotten 'the perspectives of international 
revolution'.85 Rumblings of the dispute were audible throughout 
summer and autumn 1921.86 
The Politburo wanted to avoid open dissension on the scale of the 
previous winter. For example, Lenin's main speech at the Ninth 
Congress of Soviets on 23 December was magisterially unconnected 
with the Trotski-Zinoviev debate. On international relations, Lenin 
 200 
Lenin: A Political Life 
spoke in the most general terms to the difficulties of the labour 
movement abroad; but, although he talked about the inception of a 
crisis in world capitalism, he used vague language and implied no 
criticism of Trotski. His continuing keenness on trade with the West 
would suggest that, like Trotski, he considered that Western economic 
stabilisation was on the cards.87 In future years Lenin's reticence was to 
be exploited by official party spokesmen as an indication that he 
advocated the long-term 'peaceful co-existence' of socialism and 
capitalism around the world with struggle being limited to ideologi-
cal, non-violent competition. Such was to be the interpretation of 
Nikita Khrushchev. Textual corroboration was exiguous: the best 
adducible evidence was a comment reported from a private interview 
given by Lenin to the Moscow correspondent of the Christian Science 
Monitor.88 Even then, Lenin is recorded as having mentioned co-
existence without breathing anything about its being peaceful. In 
addition, Lenin's open letter of April 1921 to party comrades in the 
Transcaucasus adumbrated a policy of 'co-habitation' with the 
capitalist West. Yet this can even less convincingly be taken as a 
commitment to long-term peaceful co-existence. Lenin himself put 
inverted commas around 'co-habitation', thereby signalling his 
recognition that an eventual violent clash between socialism and 
capitalism was probable.89 
Nor did his letter go beyond economic parameters. The political 
irreconcilability of the Soviet regime and the capitalist West was a 
foundation stone of his world-view. Events were in flux. Toning down 
Trotski's presentation, Lenin at the Ninth Congress of Soviets 
characterised capitalism with the followint words: 'What has been 
achieved is a certain fragile equilibrium'. 
Those Bolsheviks who 
thought that political as well as economic compromises should be made 
with the major capitalist powers he regarded as madmen. Chicherin as 
People's Commissar of External Affairs, for instance, secretly enjoined 
him to introduce universal suffrage. An electoral curia for 'parasites' 
(or the former middle and upper classes) would not put the party's 
power at risk and yet would induce foreign capitalists to invest in the 
Soviet republics.91 Lenin counter-suggested that Chicherin should be 
sent off to a sanatorium to recuperate mentally.92 
To Lenin's mind, trade links should be restored only if the gains of 
the October Revolution and the Civil War were not damaged. 
Perpetual international isolation would be arduous. 'And yet,' Lenin 
enquired ponderously at the Ninth Congress of Soviets, 'is such a thing 
at all conceivable that a socialist republic could exist in capitalist 
 The Rifle and the Sickle 
201 
encirclement? This is inconceivable neither in the political nor in the 
military sense. That it is conceivable in the political and military sense 
has been proven: it's already a fact.'93 This confidence that Bolshevism 
could survive was to be treated by Stalin after Lenin's death as proof 
that Lenin had believed that the building of socialism could be 
completed even in conditions of capitalist encirclement. No such 
thought crossed Lenin's mind or left his lips even though he 
increasingly behaved as if 'European socialist revolution' was not 
immediately in prospect. Lenin had been discussing only the regime's 
survival rather than the implementation of all the tasks described 
before October 1917 in The State and Revolution. In the mean time the 
Politburo was urged by him to manoeuvre carefully. Lenin's wish to 
play off one capitalist power against another was to the fore. The 
recently-signed treaties were an encouragement; nothing had had to be 
given away in internal politics. He and the Politburo had admittedly 
bowed to Turkey's preference that Soviet Azerbaidzhan rather than 
Soviet Armenia should own Nagorny Karabakh.94 But the state order 
of all Soviet republics remained intact despite such territorial re-
arrangements. Similarly, as the price of the Anglo-Soviet trade treaty, 
he had had to promise to suspend anti-capitalist propaganda in Britain 
and her empire. But this was a compromise easily made. The 
Communist International was not formally under Moscow's control 
and could go on conducting propaganda in its own name; and, of 
course, the treaty in no way stipulated a dismantlement of the so-called 
dictatorship of the proletariat in the RSFSR and the other Soviet 
republics.95 
'ON THE FOOD TAX ' 
Lenin sought to clarify the New Economic Policy with a pamphlet. In 
the weeks after the Party Congress he wrote On The Food Tax; he 
finished it on 21 Aprill921 and dispatched it to the printers for rushed 
publication.96 This exposition of party policy was not meant for the 
peasants to read. On the contrary, it was aimed at active party 
members in Moscow and the provinces. In elucidating his own 
intentions, Lenin had to work hard to keep fellow Bolsheviks on his 
side. On The Food Tax was a vital aspect of his campaign to convince 
the party. 
It was partly for this reason that, when calling for the discontinua-
tion of earlier measures, Lenin chose to accentuate aspects of 
 202 
Lenin: A Political Life 
continuity. Apparently the New Economic Policy was old hat. 
Referring to his disputes with the Left Communists, he dedicated 
over a quarter of the pamphlet to word-for-word quotations from his 
1918 pamphlet On 'Left-Wing' Infantilism and on Petit-Bourgeois 
Tendencies.91 His main point was that 'state capitalism' was no bad 
objective in a country where small-scale private production was the 
predominant form of economic activity. Lenin claimed that the dangers 
were avoidable. The premise that 'the workers and peasants' held 
power in Soviet Russia was false, but it was also an article of Bolshevik 
faith; and Lenin maintained that the supposed reality of a government 
based upon popular consent would ensure that state capitalism would 
not lead to an abandonment of the socialist commitment.98 The small 
traders, the peasants and the industrial artisans constituted the most 
numerous segment of the economically-active population. Being 
divided into tiny production units, they were difficult to control 
without resort to force. State capitalism by contrast was amenable to 
registration and direction. It also competed against and beat down the 
small-scale producers; it would do socialism's job for it.99 Large-scale 
economic organisation and up-to-date technology were prerequisites 
for the building of socialism. Lenin repeated that the agreeing of 
'concessions' with foreign entrepreneurs would make an important 
contribution to the resources of the Soviet state. The entrepreneurs 
would admittedly take their profits, but the tower social classes would 
eventually gain benefit from the diffusion of modern machinery, 
management and training. 100 
The argument that this strategy merely restored his strategy of 1918 
was not entirety misleading: industrial concessions had been an 
objective of party and government even in the Civil War. But Lenin's 
words involved, too, a deal of obfuscation. After the October 
Revolution he had retained and strengthened the state grain-trade 
monopoly; in spring 1921 he was insisting on its abolition. Private 
commerce was essential to the New Economic Policy, and he knew 
about this contrast futt wett. 101 
It was also incorrect of him to assert that the New Economic Policy 
repeated measures induced solely by the exigencies of Civil War. 
Several measures could in fact be traced back to the October 
Revolution. Of course, there had been armed struggle ever since 25 
October 1917. But the greatest intensity of Civil War came in the 
second half of 1918, when massive state control and ownership had 
already been introduced. Picking up a term in growing use among 
Bolsheviks, Lenin urged that the economics of 'War Communism' 
 The Rifle and the Sickle 
203 
should be put aside. 102 This was poor history, cunning politics. He 
foresaw the party's reluctance to abandon ultra-centralist state 
economic intervention, and he wanted to disseminate the idea that 
the New Economic Policy simply restored measures that had once had 
the general concurrence of Bolsheviks. At the same time it allowed him 
to suggest that this same New Economic Policy, which was a retreat 
from socialism in some ways, was also a further advance towards it. In 
Lenin's presentation, the end to grain requisitioning would eventually 
facilitate the inauguration of 'correct socialist product-exchange'. 103 
Utopianism still filled his pages. Probably it was sincere. Quoting his 
words from May 1918, he reiterated that the Soviet republic's society 
displayed a variety of stages of social and cultural development, 
stretching from patriarchal economy based on barter through to 
modern socialist economic forms. In 1921 he proposed that even a 
'direct transition from patriarchalism to socialism' was not impossible. 
The nomads of the central Asian steppe might undergo just such a 
transformation. The principal obstacle, according to Lenin, was the 
weakness of the Soviet state's technical resources, especially in 
electricity power-stations. 104 
Lenin still wrote as a confident social engineer. He indicated a wish 
to produce 'a uniform economic plan for the entire state' .105 He 
castigated 'the abuses of those who have crawled over to the 
communists: the old state officials, the landed gentry, the bourgeois 
and the rest of the swine'; he urged the sanctions he had recommended 
for speculators in 1918: 'Here what is needed is a terrorist purge: try 
them on the spot and, unconditionally, shoot them.' 106 He had largely 
stopped bothering with arguments put forward by non-Bolsheviks; but 
on this occasion he considered the case against terror put by Martov 
the Menshevik and Chernov the Socialist-Revolutionary. In Lenin's 
view, his critics were merely 'lackeying assistants' of the White armies 
who were enlisted to ease the organisation of a 'White Guard terror'. 
This monstrous accusation was accompanied by the asseveration that 
terror was inevitable in all countries experiencing profound social 
crises: 'There is not and cannot be a middle ground, a"third 
option".'107 
Thus his deadly intolerance did not cease in 1921: the widely-
entertained notion that Lenin conceived the New Economic policy as 
involving a relaxation in the social atmosphere for everyone who took 
no part in politics is badly mistaken: Lenin still breathed fire. But at 
least one large group of people was spared the usual threats: the so-
called speculators. 'It is impossible to distinguish speculation from 
 204 
Lenin: A Political Life 
"correct" trade,' Lenin added, ' if speculation is to be understood in the 
politico-economic sense. Freedom of trade is capitalism, capitalism is 
speculation: it would be ridiculous to close our eyes to this.' 108 The 
New Economic Policy would fail unless capitalism returned to flourish 
in a legal framework. Lenin wanted this understood from the start: 
capitalist practices had to be accepted in post-war economic 
reconstruction. And yet he would not have been Lenin if he had not 
simultaneously snarled at capitalism. Any theft, any evasion of state 
control and accountancy should be punished. Sovnarkom was already 
working on draft legislation to define what was and what was not to be 
allowed in private enterprise. He continued in like manner when he 
considered the Kronstadt mutineers and their 'cloudy slogans of 
"freedom"'. He utterly denied that the Bolsheviks had been in any way 
to blame for the revolt, and he noted the comfort taken in the events on 
Kronstadt by Mensheviks, Socialist Revolutionaries and Kadets. 109 No 
quarter should be given to these parties. Their present ploy was to 
pretend that they had dropped politics and to lie low; but no mercy 
should be shown: 'prison' was the place for them. 110 
Turning to peacetime tasks, Lenin declared that 'bureaucratism' 
affected all corners of the state's activities. It was worse in his opinion 
in Moscow than in the localities. He attributed this to the social 
composition of officialdom. The party had to continue to use the so-
called specialists from the administration of the Romanovs and to 
engage further thousands of persons from the urban lower-middle 
class. 111 Lenin stressed that the Bolsheviks themselves had to accept 
different attitudes to work if they were not to 'become bureaucratised'. 
He recommended that leading members of People's Commissariats 
should be transferred from Moscow to rural district soviets. He 
expected that dozens of such personnel would 'enthusiastically' meet 
such an invitation. 112 
This passage demonstrated a growing concern of his. But his remedy 
was hopelessly inadequate; and, in recommending it, Lenin showed 
himself to be out of touch with those many Bolshevik leaders who by 
now enjoyed and wanted to prolong their life of privilege and power in 
the capital. But there was no self-doubt in him. He proceeded also to 
brush aside long-winded doctrinal discussions: 'Less dispute about 
words! We have sinned to a boundless extent in this connection until 
now.' 113 Action was the priority. Bolsheviks had to buckle down to 
their own education: 'We must not be scared to admit that here there is 
still much that can and must be learned from the capitalist.'114 Lenin also 
urged his party to accept that, in the immediate future, the benefits of 
 The Rifle and the Sickle 
205 
the New Economic Policy would accrue to the lower middle class, 
especially to the peasants, rather than to the workers. This was 
embarrassing for the Bolsheviks, who prided themselves on being the 
'vanguard' of the working class; but conditions in the towns could not 
be improved until trade with the villages, which necessitated material 
incentives being given to the peasantry, was restored. 115 The 
repugnance of workers for the re-introduction of foreign entrepreneur-
ship was also to be overruled. 116 And yet Lenin was adamant: the New 
Economic Policy was indispensable. He summoned the party to foster 
the co-operative movement among the peasants. He conceded that 
co-ops, while helping the rural population to buy goods more cheaply, 
encouraged 'petty-bourgeois, capitalist relations'. But by encouraging 
larger units of economic activity, they would consolidate state 
capitalism. Consequently they were a means of accelerating the 
'transition to socialism'.' 17 
Lenin insisted that victory for socialism in Russia and Europe could 
not be thwarted forever. Progress might be impeded, and it remained 
Lenin's contention that it would take decades before socialism could be 
attained in Russia. A foreshortening of the possible time-scale was 
conceivable only if socialist revolutions broke out beforehand in 
countries like 'England, Germany, America'. 118 Lenin left the topic at 
that. He entirely omitted to explain how state capitalism would be 
turned into socialism. The New Economic Policy offered a starting 
point and a destination; it did not provide a route. Much as he had 
clarified his intentions, Lenin had not dealt with the underlying 
strategical quandary of the agrarian reform. He tried to brazen things 
out. As he had done in the past when faced by an internal party 
difficulty, he used the old trick of attacking the other socialist parties in 
Russia. None of them, he asserted, really knew what it wanted at the 
moment. They were large in number, but they were vacillating. The 
Bolsheviks were few, but they were united: 'And we know what we 
want. And for that reason we shall win.' 119 
THE TENTH PARTY CONFERENCE 
And so Lenin began to resemble a door-to-door salesman who, having 
sold an article to his customers one day, finds himself pursued down 
the street by them the next. On the Food Tax had been offered to them 
as a guarantee that the article was genuinely serviceable: instead it 
added to the wrath of the customers. Information about disquiet was 
 206 
Lenin: A Political Life 
freely available to the central party leadership. Opinion among 
Moscow Bolsheviks was very agitated; the City Party Committee 
secretary P. S. Zaslavski was still reporting late into the summer that 
the fellow party members under his control hated the reform ratified at 
the Tenth Party Congress. 120 The concern was that the anger at the 
New Economic Policy was not confined to oppositionists but was a 
widely-held feeling in the party. If further evidence was needed, it was 
supplied by the proceedings of the Fourth Congress of Trade Unions in 
mid-April. Mikhail Tomski, who had supported Lenin in the 'trade 
union discussion' and headed the Central Council of the trade union 
movement on behalf of the party, was deputed to present a motion in 
line with official party policy. This he did. But David Ryazanov 
pointed out that Tomski's motion did not include a reference to 
'proletarian democracy' in the trade unions despite its acceptance by 
the Party Congress. Tomski gave way. 121 But Lenin, when he heard of 
this, was infuriated. Ryazanov's amendment, while formally unobjec-
tionable, stressed the need for trade union leaders to be elected and for 
trade unions to be responsive to the aspirations of their members. In 
Lenin's view, this was but a short step from a campaign to overturn the 
New Economic Policy by favouring the workers at the expense of the 
peasants. Tomski was withdrawn from the Central Council; and Lenin 
and Stalin replaced him at the Congress of Trade Unions and, after 
cajoling the Bolshevik fraction, secured a repeal of Ryazanov's 
amendment. 122 
This was not the end of the matter. At the Central Committee he 
barked that Tomski had betrayed the trust reposed in him. Lenin 
stunned his colleagues by invoking the Party Congress resolution on 
party unity and demanding the exclusion of Tomski from the Central 
Committee and even the party itself. 123 But a technical problem had 
existed for Lenin: namely that the Congress resolution on party unity 
laid down no procedure for expelling a Central Committee member. 
Resourcefully and angrily Lenin proposed to convoke a joint meeting 
of the Central Committee and the Central Control Commission as a 
sort of court to try Tomski. Dzierzynski as a supporter of internal 
party discipline backed Lenin. And yet Lenin felt he had to back down 
since he had 'only an insignificant majority' in the Central Committee 
for such ruthlessness against Tomski. A commission of Stalin, 
Dzierzynski, Frunze and Kiselev was set up to investigate the affair. 124 
Quietly the matter was dropped, and Lenin was left to allow his ire to 
expire. What had been shown beyond contradiction at the Fourth 
Congress of Trade Unions was that booklets and Pravda were going to 
 The Rifle and the Sickle 
207 
have an inadequate effect. The New Economic Policy was a massive 
jolt to the party. The Tenth Party Congress had given its approval; but, 
on drawing second breath, probably most party leaders and activists in 
the localities felt that the basic arguments had been given insufficient 
ventilation. This most doctrinally-obsessed of political parties needed 
its practical measures to be vetted for ideological rectitude. The Party 
Congress had been an important and gigantic advance in this direction; 
but the goal had not been reached. Consequently an extraordinary 
assembly was deemed necessary. Two months after the Party Congress 
it was determined to hold a Party Conference. The announcement was 
made on II May. 125 Perforce the Conference's organisation was 
hurried and ramshackle; but Lenin was reconciled to its necessity. He 
had come to recognise that an even further extension of the New 
Economic Policy was vital. It could not be imposed without the co-
operation of the party leadership in Moscow and the provinces. The 
performance at the Party Congress had to be repeated at the Party 
Conference. Once more the individual performance of Lenin would be 
crucial. If the birth of the New Economic Policy was secured by the 
Congress, it was the Conference which would guarantee its paediatric 
care. 
The Tenth Party Conference was the scene of altercations so furious 
that the official minutes of the proceedings included only the reports of 
the official spokesmen and their concluding speeches. The debates were 
withheld from publication (and, in the Soviet period, scholars were 
inhibited from revealing much about them). 126 239 delegates assembled 
in the Sverdlov Hall of the Kremlin on 26 May 1921 to hear their 
leadership's account of themselves. 127 
Lenin's opening report summarised his recently-published pamphlet 
On The Food Tax; he moved through its points with a few explanatory 
remarks. He was brisk, confident and imposing. But opposition was 
inevitable: the Politburo had arranged things so that four accompany-
ing reports should be given before discussions might be opened. V. P. 
Milyutin reported on small-scale industry, L. M. Khinchuk on 
agricultural co-ops, A. I. Sviderski on food supplies and E. A. 
Preobrazhenski on finances. These took so long that Sviderski and 
Preobrazhenski had to wait until the second session on the same 
evening before they could speak. 128 A united front was shown to a 
large extent. This comforted Lenin since Khinchuk and Sviderski had 
not been completely happy with the abolition of grain requisitioning 
and Preobrazhenski remained worried that the measures were more 
favourable to kulaks than was desirable. 129 It was also noticeable that 
 208 
Lenin: A Political Life 
the parameters of the New Economic Policy had been expanded. 
Milyutin suggested that, as the country waited for large-scale industry 
to be reconstructed, manufacturing enterprises of small and medium 
size should be transferred back to private entrepreneurs. 130 They had 
the flair and local knowledge to produce for the peasants, and their 
activity would restore the cycle of trade between town and countryside. 
Preobrazhenski added in his contribution that monetary measures were 
necessary to put a brake on inflation. 131 Their words were like extra 
chapters to Lenin's booklet; they constituted a case for New Economic 
Policy not merely to be accepted but also extended into other areas of 
the economy. 
The Central Committee, which had sanctioned this initiative, could 
not be accused of cowardice. A highly unpopular agrarian reform was 
not to be compromised; instead it would be reinforced. The decision 
had been taken that the Conference would be confronted with the full 
range of the party leadership's thought. Five lengthy lectures had come 
from Lenin, Milyutin, Khinchuk, Sviderski and Preobrazhenski. The 
time had come for the audience to announce its response. 
The first speaker from the floor was I. M. Vareikis, who headed the 
Vitebsk Provincial Committee and had criticised the Central 
Committee in the Civil War. 132 Vareikis talked of the hostility to the 
New Economic Policy in the party. 133 He himself did not object to the 
abolition of grain requisitioning, and everyone else who mentioned it at 
the Conference agreed - however reluctantly - that the decision had 
been 'correct'. But the extension of the New Economic Policy was 
another matter altogether for them. Vareikis, like speakers after him, 
attacked Lenin. However cleverly Lenin had positioned himself under 
the shelter of the Central Committee, he failed to dispel the perception 
that he was the architect of the reform. Vareikis, a Bolshevik 
sophisticated in the party's doctrines, challenged the Marxist validity 
of Lenin's attitude to the peasantry. Lenin in previous works had 
described the peasantry as a feudal class in an advanced stage of 
disintegration, under the impact of capitalist economic development, 
into two antagonistic new classes: the proletariat and the bourgeoisie; 
he had also stressed in the Party Programme that the party should 
enhance the interests of the poorer and middling segments of the 
peasantry. To Vareikis's mind, the New Economic Policy abandoned 
this approach.' 34 Not troubling to fire a shot over the bows, he had 
blasted a hole in the contents of On the Food Tax. 
The next speaker was Yuri Larin. He scrutinised Lenin's pamphlet 
with acidic wit. Larin had not forgotten Lenin's description of his 
 The Rifle and the Sickle 
209 
proposal for a 'single economic plan' as 'the most boring scholasti-
cism'.135 Now that Lenin's own proposed ideas, theses and booklet 
were being savaged, Larin remarked: 'At this moment, comrades, I 
would remind comrade Lenin that writing theses is a rottenjobl' 136 His 
substantive contention was that the New Economic Policy should give 
greater attention to large-scale industry and the plight of the urban 
working class. He had the Conference's sympathy, being granted 
permission to speak for three times the prescribed length of time. 137 
There was no respite next morning on 27 May. Lenin had touched a 
raw nerve in his opening report by demanding that the local party 
committees should exercise greater initiative in fulfilling the Tenth 
Congress's resolutions. N. L. Meshcheryakov, from the Pravda 
editorial board, retorted that the People's Commissariat of Food 
Supplies would not tolerate the slightest deviation from highly 
centralist forms of management. He added that Lenin and the Central 
Committee should take the blame for the low level of understanding 
about the New Economic Policy in the provinces. 138 Central 
Committee member V. Y. Chubar added to Lenin's woes. Chubar re-
asserted that kulaks had a greater part in agriculture in Ukraine than in 
Russia. Like Vareikis, he called for a policy which discriminated more 
strictly between the rich and the poor of the village; and he suggested 
that Lenin should offer 'not belles lettres but something definite' about 
the attitude to be taken to rural capitalism.139 The subsequent three 
speakers spoke with similar antagonism. Always the target was Lenin. 
Some relief was offered when Osinski spoke; but even Osinski averred 
that the central party leaders should be more specific about the time-
scale for the New Economic Policy. 140 But then the assault started 
again. A. S. Kiselev, a Workers' Oppositionist, attacked what he and 
others treated as the neglect of large-scale industry. 141 Not a single 
delegate rose in Lenin's defence. There had been no such Congress or 
Conference in the history of the Bolshevik party, not even in the Brest-
Litovsk dispute. 
Khinchuk, Preobrazhenski and Sviderski returned to the platform 
towards the end of the session. Their words were supportive of Lenin; 
this was important since by then it was clear that he was being held 
individually culpable. Even so, Khinchuk blurted out that Lenin's 
report had veered in the direction of'fantasy'. He asserted in particular 
that large-scale factories had already succumbed to disintegration. The 
real industrial intiative in the country was already in the hands of small 
enterprises. In short, Lenin's report had been out of touch with the real 
situation.142 With supporters like this, Lenin needed no opponents. The 
 210 
Lenin: A Political Life 
strains showed in Lenin's concluding statement. He mistakenly 
assumed that his critic Vareikis was representing the opinions of 
'Petrograd comrades' (whereas Vareikis had spoken explicitly about 
non-metropolitan cities). 143 Such blundering led into over-aggressive-
ness: 'What was said by Vareikis was essentially uncommunistic and 
was reminiscent of Martov in content.' To Vareikis's enquiry whether 
the peasantry constituted a class, Lenin gave a positive but curt answer: 
he refused to open a dialogue over this important aspect of Marxist 
theory} 44 
The pressure on the central party leadership remained. Delegates had 
already insisted that a report on the Fourth Congress of Trade Unions 
be put on the agenda. 145 The brouhaha had been too noisy for the 
Party Conference to ignore. Molotov was given the job of reporting on 
the item in the fourth session in the evening. He enlivened his story by 
accusing both the Workers' Opposition and the supporters of Trotski 
in the 'trade union controversy' as having deviated from Bolshevism. 146 
Molotov made no secret about the resentful relations in the Central 
Committee. The atmosphere in the Sverdlov Hall grew heavier. 
Tension increased, but nobody was prepared for what happened 
next. Molotov had given information about everything except the 
Central Committee's comportment towards the Congress of Trade 
Unions. Lenin had been absent for most of the report. But catching the 
end of it as he returned to the hall, he could contain himself no longer. 
There was nothing he objected to in Molotov's presentation. Rather it 
was that he suddenly felt that the difficulties which he had experienced 
in the Central Committee should be made public. This was a 
completely uncharacteristic step: he never asked others to pity 
him. 147 But the bruising he had suffered at the Conference had 
wounded him deeply. Without warning he demanded the right to speak 
after Molotov. The Central Committee's work, and his own in 
particular, had been criticised by practically everybody. He insisted 
on a right of reply. 
Lenin rasped that in the two months since the Party Congress 
illnesses had struck the Central Committee. An exhausted Trotski had 
been given leave of absence. Zinoviev had had two heart attacks. 
Kamenev's chronic heart condition had not improved. Stalin had been 
unwell and Bukharin had only just recovered from an unspecified 
disease: 'Thus the entire Central Committee became ineffectual'. 148 
Lenin implied that the work of the Central Committee had fallen 
entirely upon his shoulders. His account was not without credibility: a 
Central Committee plenum had taken place on the last day of the Party 
 The Rifle and the Sickle 
211 
Congress in mid-March, and did not meet again until mid-May. 149 Yet 
Lenin failed to add was that the Politburo had filled the breach. 
Between the Congress and the Conference it convened a dozen times. 
Attendance had varied no more than in the Civil War. Kamenev, 
Zinoviev and Stalin were present at most of them. It had not been a 
one-man Politburo in spring 1921 .. 50 
Nonetheless Lenin had indisputably carried a greater load than the 
rest, and the load involved a concatenation of crises in the economy, 
administration, politics, security and foreign policy. It was in this 
situation that Central Committee member Tomski perpetrated his act 
of disobedience to the Central Committee's policy on the trade unions. 
Lenin had seen red. This most self-controlled man, whose outbursts 
were always deliberate, declared: 'Here it was difficult to keep a cool 
head.' This meiosis, if expressed by anyone else, would have provoked 
laughter. Coming from Lenin, it sounded utterly serious. His anger 
persisted, and he told the Conference how he had proceeded to invoke 
the Party Congress's resolution on party unity and demand the 
expulsion of Tomski from the Central Committee and from the 
party. 151 This revelation astonished the Conference; no one had known 
how abrasive the situation had been among the central party leaders. 
Lenin, still infuriated, told the Conference that he hoped that this case 
of insubordination to the Central Committee would be the last. He 
reverted to his theme of the 'correlation of two class forces', as 
constituted by the working class and the peasantry. Describing it as the 
trickiest aspect of the New Economic Policy, he again expressed the 
fear lest it should find expression in internal party factions. Tomski's 
pro-worker orientation was, in Lenin's opinion, a sign of such a 
danger. The solution was greater discipline. 152 
The Conference was shocked into silence. An open vote was called 
and the decision was taken not to debate his contribution. 153 It was as 
if everyone understood that the Conference had to apply salve to the 
central leadership's wounds. The irritation displayed by speakers in the 
earlier discussion of the New Economic Policy had at any rate been 
unaccompanied by specific proposals on policy. Vague adjustments 
alone had been put forward. A climate of disgruntled, even apologetic, 
acceptance had been formed. Nobody liked the New Economic Policy: 
not even Lenin exulted in it. He had managed to win over the 
Conference by staving off the verbal assaults and exhausting and 
shaming his opponents. More than that: he had re-affirmed that he had 
done his best in difficult circumstances. Essentially he wanted 
confirmation that he had done his best and that his measures were 
 212 
Lenin: A Political Life 
approved. No other Bolshevik leader could have saved the foundations 
of the New Economic Policy at this Conference in quite this way. Lenin 
sat down, battered but victorious at last. 
The Conference then turned to two other political issues. Karl Radek 
reported on 'the role of the Socialist Revolutionaries and Mensheviks' 
and suggested that the Bolshevik party was being infiltrated by its 
enemies. The Socialist Revolutionaries were especially worrisome. 
Radek noted that Chernov and his friends were expecting an 'SR 
insurrection' with the participation of the peasantry. He sat down after 
calling for 'a merciless struggle' against both Socialist Revolutionaries 
and Mensheviks. 154 After a short break, in the absence of Zinoviev who 
was ill, Radek gave a second report on the Communist International. 
He was exercised by the possibilities of socialist revolutions in Europe. 
Already, as he admitted, there were controversies among Politburo 
members as to whether the Communist International confronted a 
period of 'quiescence' when the capitalist economies would stabilise 
themselves and prevent revolutionary conturbation. Yet Radek also 
adduced J. M. Keynes's book on the treaty of Versailles, which had 
cogently interpreted the peace in Europe as dangerously punitive 
towards the industrial capacity of the vanquished powers. 155 Conse-
quently revolutions might not long be delayed. Radek left it at that, 
having itemised the current debate and called for further analysis. Then 
he came to the March Action. Radek placed the blame for the fiasco 
squarely upon the German communist leadership. Once Clara Zetkin 
and Paul Levi had stormed out of the German Central Committee, a 
group of incompetent hotheads had been left in charge. 156 Radek 
studiously avoided mentioning the encouragement offered to the same 
hotheads by Zinoviev and Bukharin. In this instance, at least, the 
Central Committee of the Russian Communist Party succeeded in 
putting a lid on its past deliberations and mistakes. 
The Conference's fifth and last session was held on 28 May. Open-
season sniping at the Central Committee was resumed when Molotov 
reported on party organisation. E. 0. Bumazhny attacked Lenin. He 
repeated the contention that, while Lenin rightly stated that the 
provincial organisations did not understand the New Economic Policy, 
the fault lay with the lack of clarification available from the Central 
Committee. For Bumazhny, Lenin's On the Food Tax was aimed at too 
sophisticated a readership. Lenin had misjudged the needs of situation: 
the ordinary party members as wen as the Bolshevik inte11ectua1 elite 
had to be addressed. A 'short party catechism' should rapidly be 
 The Rifle and the Sickle 
213 
composed for dissemination among the rank-and-file membership. But 
Bumazhny's reprimand was ignored; the Conference's will to end 
polemics supervened. 1 57 
The composite resolution on the economy proposed by the Central 
Committee spokesmen, with a few amendments, was passed.158 Co-
ops, small-scale private industry, monetary stabilisation became 
integral segments of the New Economic Policy. Trouble looked as if 
it would arise when a perceptive delegate shouted out that a 
discrepancy existed between the respective assumptions about the 
prospects of European socialist revolution displayed by Radek and 
Lenin. But Lenin replied dismissively. He would only declare broadly: 
'Of course, if revolution occurs in Europe, we'll naturally change the 
policy.'159 A certain Shatunov raked over the coals by announcing 
disgust that words such as trade were included in the resolution on the 
New Economic Policy. This time Lenin reacted more diplomatically. 
'The question,' he conceded aimiably, 'is a delicate one, of course.' But 
he secured the Conference's rejection of the suggested amendment. 160 
He also succeeded in repudiating a request for greater emphasis on the 
consolidation of state-owned collective farms. 161 The only amendment 
that appealed to him came from Kiselev, who proposed that 'punitive 
measures' should be taken throughout the economy to eradicate 
corruption. 162 Lenin assured the Conference that he did not intend the 
New Economic Policy as a capitalist free-for-all. But his closing speech 
stressed, too, that the New Economic Policy would be implemented 
'seriously and for a long time'. The European revolution was ultimately 
vital to the October Revolution. But the Russian Communist Party 
could not guess when it would happen. 163 
For the moment the Bolsheviks had to elaborate their measures on 
the premise that the October Revolution stood alone. His speech 
obtained the traditional applause. But it was not ecstatic. The 
Conference had been gruelling, and had put Lenin on his mettle. The 
job of selling the New Economic Policy to the party was far from over. 
But nobody could any longer state that the reform had been slipped 
into the Bolshevik official projections without sustained consultation 
and ratification. However reluctantly, the delegates had accorded 
sanction to the resolutions of the Party Congress. The audience was not 
happy with itself; but it had been given the chance to express its mind 
and then voted with the Central Committee. It was perhaps fitting that 
the Conference was brought abruptly to a closure without the usual 
collective rendition of the lnternationale. 164 
 214 
Lenin: A Political Life 
DIVIDED RETREAT 
The Conference had barely finished when, supplied with suitable drafts 
from the Central Committee, Sovnarkom embarked on a legislative 
campaign to extend the New Economic Policy. The lines sketched by 
Lenin, Milyutin, Khinchuk, Sviderski, and Preobrazhenski were 
pursued with panache. In June 1921 Sovnarkom announced its 
intention to achieve 'a healthy monetary circulation' .165 Official 
indifference to inflation disappeared. In July, a licensing system for 
private traders was introduced. 166 In August, the large nationalised 
factories were put under obligation to balance their books. The profit 
incentive returned, and the Party Conference's priority for the recovery 
of small and medium-sized industrial enterprises led to the leasing of 
most of them to private businessmen. 167 In September, the government 
insisted that no attempt should be made to narrow wage differentials. 
Nor should factories be expected to give social-security support to their 
workers; and collective wage bargaining through the trade unions was 
re-established in November168 Furthermore, the quest for foreign 
concessionaires able and willing to assist the country's economic 
reconstruction, especially in the timber and oil industries, continued. 
Salvation, having failed to be secured by the export of revolution, 
was sought through the import of capital. 169 The party and state 
authorities could not be accused of inactivity: instructions, decrees and 
laws issued like a flood through a broken dam in the second half of 
1921. 
Lenin had been the only Politburo member to speak at the 
Conference; but thereafter he said even less about the New Economic 
Policy than in the months of spring. This engendered stories which 
made the conflict between Vareikis and Lenin still more colourful than 
in reality. Nikolai Valentinov, an ex-Bolshevik who had many contacts 
with the Bolshevik leadership in Moscow, recorded having heard that 
Vareikis shouted that Lenin had lopped off 'whole chapters of 
Marxism'. Lenin is said to have retorted: 'Please don't try giving me 
training as to what to take and what to leave out of Marxism: hens 
aren't taught by their eggs.'170 
The widespread gossip about the Tenth Party Conference showed 
that antagonism to the New Economic Policy, while being too 
ineffectual to change it, remained strong. It was not until October 
that Lenin recommenced his public defence of reform. Commemorat-
ing the fourth anniversary of the Bolshevik party's seizure of power, he 
wrote in Pravda: 'Would that such a global affair could be begun 
 The Rifle and the Sickle 
215 
without failures and without mistakes! But begun it we have. We are 
carrying it through. It is precisely now with our "new economic policy" 
that we're correcting a whole series of mistakes, that we're learning 
how to construct a socialist building in a petty-bourgeois country 
without mistakes.' 171 His only other major statements came in two 
speeches: the first to the regime's educational officials, the speech to the 
Moscow Bolshevik Party Provincial Conference in late October. 172 The 
Moscow activists gave him a hard time. I. N. Stukov and V. G. Sorin 
harangued him over his contempt for War Communism. The re-
inception of legal private commerce was another bone of contention. 
S.M. Semkov shouted at him: 'They didn't teach us how to trade when 
we were in prison!' 173 The Eleventh Party Conference returned to such 
matters in December 1921. Illness prevented Lenin's attendance and 
Kamenev deputised for him. Passionate criticisms of major aspects of 
the New Economic Policy were made. Yuri Larin drew attention to the 
inadequacy of food supplies to workers. 174 M.P. Zhakov complained 
about the vagueness of the party's intentions as explained by its central 
leaders.175 A. Z. Goltsman asserted that, in the race to meet the 
demands of peasant consumers, the interests oflarge-scale industry had 
been neglected. 176 
Perhaps the most acute comments at the Eleventh Conference came 
from Evgeni Preobrazhenski, who drew attention to rural social 
developments. His main point - an ominous one for all Conference 
participants - was that the New Economic Policy offered little to the 
poor peasants. As Preobrazhenski demonstrated, they lacked the 
equipment to cultivate their allotted land. This would compel them to 
rent it out to richer peasants. Soviet laws would be broken, and the 
main beneficiaries would be the kulaks. 177 
Lenin's health improved sufficiently on 23 December for him to 
address the Ninth Congress of Soviets; and, although the old fire was 
evident, he offered no promise of immediate economic betterment. He 
turned rousingly to the international political situation: 'In conclusion 
I must state, comrades, that the problem which we are resolving this 
year and which we have as yet resolved so badly - the unifying of the 
workers and peasants in a solid economic union even in circumstances 
of the greatest poverty and devastation - has now been correctly posed 
by us; it is a correct line that we have taken, and there can be no doubts 
on that score. And this problem is not only Russian one but also 
global.' 178 He did not hasten to try to rebut Preobrazhenski's 
commentary. Indeed cognoscenti of Lenin's agrarian analysis in 1917 
would have noticed how closely Preobrazhenski followed it;179 Lenin 
 216 
Lenin: A Political Life 
could not dismiss his critic out of hand. But Preobrazhenski, who until 
then had worked harmoniously with Lenin, irritated him more than 
any other leading Bolshevik opponent at the time. In March 1922 
Preobrazhenski summarised his objections in a set of theses which 
indicated 'a tendency towards collapse' in the economy of the poor 
sections of the peasantry. Lenin castigated the 'empty' phrases and 
'boring' expressions of intent. He regarded the theses as basically 
'unsuitable'. 180 And yet his own proposed changes were rather limited 
in scope. The collapse of poor-peasant agriculture, he suggested, 
should instead be described as a hold-up of development; and the anti-
kulak passages should be softened so as to commit the party only to a 
'limitation of the exploitative aspirations' of the kulaks. 181 
Lenin was vague about his general vision of the New Economic 
Policy in the medium-term future. His recurrent talk of retreat invited 
the question as to where it should be halted. On 29 October 1921 he 
replied as follows: 'This question is incorrectly posed because only the 
further implementation of our turnabout can give material for an 
answer to it. We shall retreat until we have learned for ourselves, until 
we have prepared ourselves to go over into a solid attack.' 182 
This was the sort of rhetorical souffle which, if cooked by a 
Provisional Government minister in 1917 or a Bolshevik opositionist in 
1918-1920, Lenin would have relished puncturing. For the moment he 
busied himself with practical modifications of the New Economic 
Policy and, as with Preobrazhenski, discouraged theoretical dispute. In 
this he had the advantage that, at least by midsummer, no central or 
local Bolshevik leader seriously proposed that the Politburo should re-
introduce food-supplies requisitioning. This was the crucial ingredient 
of the New Economic Policy, and the Kaganoviches and Tsyurupas 
ceased to call for its removal. Nevertheless there remained much to 
argue about. Even if the food tax and the retail trade in grain was no 
longer controversial, questions persisted as to how far the New 
Economic Policy should be extended. Lenin, despite a certain success in 
inhibiting the growth of a highly abstract discussion of Marxist theory, 
could not reasonably abort deliberations on particular issues. It was 
predictable that not all his fellow Bolsheviks were reconciled to the 
further measures on trade, finance and industry. The condition of the 
entire urban sector of the economy was a source of widespread 
concern. The Russian Communist Party especially prided itself as being 
a party for the workers. Its objectives for the future economy began 
from the premise that cities, factories and large-scale social units were 
the crucible of the development of communism. 
 The Rifle and the Sickle 
217 
Yet it became impossible to avoid discussion when, on 7 August 
1921, none other than Politburo colleague Trotski wrote to the Central 
Committee calling for a revision of official measures on industry. He 
asked for the State Planning Commission to be charged with 'the 
elaboration, supervision and regulation of the implementation of an 
economic plan on a daily and hourly basis'. The existing muddle in the 
large nationalised factories would thereby be eradicated. Essentially 
Trotski called for the State Planning Commission (or Gosplan) to be 
accorded legislative authority. 183 
In fact all Bolshevik leaders were committed to the reinforcement of 
central state planning sooner or later; and Lenin was no exception 
either in 1921 or thereafter. Furthermore, he was determined that any 
discussion about the New Economic Policy should involve only 
Bolsheviks. He could not stress too heavily that Bolshevik hegemony 
over contemporary issues of politics, economics and culture should be 
maintained, 184 and he kept a weather eye open for those anti-
Bolsheviks seeking to take advantage of the reforms introduced by 
the Politburo. He spotted such attempts especially quickly when they 
appeared in the form of the printed word. One of his angriest missives 
was to the People's Commissariat of Agriculture on 27 August I 92 I. 
The reason for his intemperance was the permission being given to S. 
Maslov, no less a figure than the last Minister of Agriculture in 
Kerenski's Provisional Government, to publish his book entitled The 
Peasant Economy. Bolsheviks arguing among themselves were one 
thing; Bolsheviks indulging their enemies by allowing them access to 
the printing press was entirely another. Lenin reviewed the Maslov 
book in a few brief words worthy less of the Times Literary Supplement 
than of the polemical tracts of John Calvin or Huldreich Zwingli: 
'From a glance it is evident that this is a disgusting little bourgeois 
book through and through, conning the peasant with its exhibitionistic 
bourgeois "scientific" falsehood' .185 
But he could not be so scathing about Trotski: cordial relations 
among Politburo colleagues had to be maintained. 186 A further reason 
lay in the origins of the New Economic Policy. Even as Lenin had been 
initiating discussions on agrarian reform in February 1921, he was 
chairing Sovnarkom sessions which required Gosplan to draw up a 
single comprehensive plan for all sectors of the economy. 187 The 
implication of this is that Trotski was not challenging the validity of 
New Economic Policy but asserting a desire for the party leaders to 
abide by the original common assumption that central state planning 
would accompany the abandonment of grain requisitioning. 188 
 218 
Lenin: A Political Life 
If Trotski's proposal in August 1921 was that the Politburo's 
February 1921 assumption should be honoured and given additional 
practical force, it was Lenin's thinking that had changed. The New 
Economic Policy, as it had evolved after the Tenth Party Congress, had 
involved the abolition of important aspects of the state's authority to 
intervene in the operation of industry, agriculture and trade. The scale 
of Soviet state intervention remained massive, but legislation had 
indubitably reduced it considerably by midsummer. Lenin promoted 
the change and disliked Trotski's proposal on the grounds that it would 
lead to bureaucratic meddling. The Central Committee, while not 
denying the need for a central state economic plan, sided with Lenin in 
refusing to provide Gosplan with the more ambitious rights requested 
for it by Trotski. 189 A battle lay ahead. Scarcely had the ashes of the 
'trade union discussion' been raked into the earth than Trotski and 
Lenin were lighting a touch-paper for yet another inflammation of the 
party. Nevertheless even Trotski had learned a lesson from the winter 
of 1920-1921. Another such controversy, fought tooth and nail 
ideologically, was not to his liking. It may also be that he understood 
that, if he bided his time, such was the antagonism to the current 
particular development of the New Economic Policy that the majority 
of party leaders might come over to his opinions. No wonder that 
Lenin had been acting cautiously with his day-to-day tactics since the 
Tenth Party Conference. Not for the first time he must have mused 
whether those calling themselves Leninists were really on his side. 
