 9 Testament to a 
Revolution 
ILLNESS AND PRECAUTIONS 
Dispute is basic to politics. But discussions among ambitious and even 
vengeful leaders are often softened by the knowledge that a common 
will needs to be displayed to society. This is especially necessary for a 
dictatorial elite. The risk of opposition increases if the general public 
perceives that the leaders are divided. Prominent Bolsheviks were not 
unusual in trying to hide away the altercations among themselves. By 
and large they had succeeded since the Tenth Party Congress. Most 
people knew next to nothing about the Bolshevik wrangling about the 
New Economic Policy; and the rumours about dissension in the party, 
which had came to the ears of those observers with friends in the 
party's higher echelons, were dying down. The display of unity at the 
Eleventh Party Congress reinforced the image of a unified central 
leadership. 
Reality was different. And it was Lenin, despite his recurrent calls to 
his leading comrades to stick together and avoid dispute, who 
instigated the greatest controversies in the second half of 1922. He 
turned angrily upon most of his colleagues, one by one, over several 
evolving policies. There were rows about foreign trade, about state 
bureaucracy, about the Soviet constitution, about party administration 
and even about the division of responsibilities among these same 
colleagues. Feelings about the New Economic Policy still ran high. 
Bolshevik leaders, including Lenin, were irked that a retreat from 
supposedly socialist policies had been forced upon them. Their 
awareness of the country's political and economic weaknesses served 
to make them edgier still. Not only Lenin and Trotski but also the rest 
of the Politburo peppered their public statements with references to the 
French Revolution and its eventual retreat from ideological radicalism. 
The possibility that the New Economic Policy might initiate a counter-
revolution from within was in their thoughts and was sustained by the 
stridency of attacks made by non-Bolshevik Russians in emigration 
who predicted this very denouement. N. Ustryalov, a Kadet, urged his 
friends to return to Russia to help rebuild Russia and ready themselves 
256 
 Testament to a Revolution 
257 
for the attrition of Bolshevism; and Mensheviks and Socialist-
Revolutionaries constantly declared that the economic retreat would 
have to be followed by political concessions. Would the glory of the 
October Revolution be buried in the mud of a capitalist restoration? 
Lenin's illness reduced the chances for differences of opinion 
remaining amicable in the Politburo. He had always had a tendency 
towards intemperance if he was not in control of a situation. He hated 
his enforced convalescence at the Gorki mansion-cum-sanatorium, and 
did everything possible to keep in touch with Moscow. A direct 
telephone line was installed, which saved him from having to route his 
calls via Podolsk. 1 He had a library of four hundred volumes and 
cinema facilities were also installed, and a Rolls-Royce bought in 
London in 1921 by Foreign Trade Commissar Lev Krasin was kept for 
him in the garage.2 But he still resented the slackening of his grasp on 
decisions made in party and government. Furthermore, his choleric 
propensities were aggravated by a medical condition which involved 
sharp swings between elation and depression. Through the early 
months of 1922 his irascibility had worsened as the problems with his 
health recurred and his authority became harder for him to impose. 
On 25 May 1922 his difficulties almost became terminal when he 
suffered a major stroke at Gorki. 3 Colleagues had become accustomed 
to his determination to participate in politics from a distance, and the 
failure of the doctors to predict the event lulled them into assuming 
that he might soon recover completely. His headaches and insomnia in 
1921 had been seriously debilitating, but no permanent disablement 
seemed in prospect. The stroke was a shock for everyone. He bad kept 
his worst symptoms a secret from all around him. There were only 
three exceptions to this: his personal doctor F. A. Gete and his personal 
bodyguard Petr Pakaln;4 and another doctor, L. 0. Darkevich, who 
examined him as recently as 4 March. With Darkevich his mood was 
especially gloomy: 'Could it not be, of course, that this carries the 
threat of madness?' But Darkevich tried to reassure him that no such 
diagnosis was plausible.5 Even so, Lenin kept his own pessimistic 
counsel. 6 At the news of his major stroke, he could no longer sieve out 
what he wanted the doctors to know. A group of them were sent out 
from Moscow to attend him, and were shocked by his condition. His 
whole right side was affected. The arm and leg were immobilised, and 
he lost the capacity of speech. Professors Forster and Klemperer from 
Germany were among the distinguished specialists who attended him. 
The Gorki sanatorium by early June had more doctors than patients 
and administrative staff.7 
 258 
Lenin: A Political Life 
The central party leaders surveyed these developments carefully, 
deciding to make no public announcement. It was four weeks after the 
stroke before Pravda carried a medical bulletin. By then the Politburo 
was facing difficulty in explaining Lenin's protracted absence from 
Moscow. Even so, the bulletin made light of the illness and emphasised 
that a rapid recuperation was anticipated. No reference to a stroke was 
made.8 Lenin was later to joke bitterly about such evasiveness: 'I used 
to think that the best diplomats were in The Hague, but it turns out 
that they're in Moscow: they're the doctors who composed bulletins 
about my illness. '9 
He had coped with bouts of ill-health for many years. As a youth he 
had been as strong as an ox, but an ox who had been looked after well 
by his mother and their servants. Both a steady life-style and regular 
meals were difficult to guarantee once he left home for St Petersburg in 
autumn 1893. Certainly he had enough money for decent lodgings. 
And yet the circumstances of a clandestine revolutionary, even after he 
departed for the emigration in 1900, were disruptive. The constant 
demands of being a writer as well as an organiser took their toll on him, 
and the nervous strain of his polemics aggravated his malaise. He 
suffered an ulcer in 1893, a bout of pneumonia in 1895, insomnia in 
1899. Both the ulcer and the insomnia were recurrent problems.10 
Lenin had always been attentive about his health. His warders in prison 
in 1895 were impressed by his daily routine of press-ups and trunk-
rolls, and Nikolai Valentinov recalled how unusual he was among 
fellow revolutionaries in his determination to stay fit. 11 Yet there was 
no relief from political irritations. His 'nerves' were a topic of 
complaint by him, especially during and immediately after disputes 
with party opponents. 12 He often wrote to his relatives about his need 
to get back on an even physical keel. Exhaustion caused by his ulcer 
and the sleeplessness was made worse by severe headaches. The loss of 
his youthful rude health agitated him. Krupskaya recorded the change: 
'He was not weak, but he was also not particularly strong.' 13 Doctors 
were often consulted by him. In Switzerland, at some unspecified time 
after 1900, he had visited a prominent medical specialist. The verdict 
was blunt: 'C'est le cerveau.'14 
Lenin was alarmed. His father had died of cerebral atherosclerosis in 
1886, and he must have surmised that the same fate might await him. 
Problems continued in the ensuing years. Even before the assassination 
attempt in August 1918, his insomnia, nerves and headaches had 
discomfited him badly. 15 The symptoms persisted in the Civil War. 
Maksim Gorki heard from Lenin about the pains in his head; his sister 
 Testament to a Revolution 
259 
Mariya remarked how savage they had become by the winter of 192(}-
1921. Professor Osipov, one of Lenin's doctors, was later to discover 
about incidents involving more than headaches. When out hunting in 
the woods, the Soviet leader had slumped down on a tree stump, 
clutching and rubbing his right leg. On that occasion Lenin had tried to 
make little of his difficulty: 'My leg's tired, I've got pins and needles.'16 
These were to be hints for Osipov that Lenin had almost certainly 
suffered a series of mild strokes. Indeed there had been a number of 
'partial attacks' which involved a temporary loss of consciousness 
lasting from between twenty minutes and two hours. 17 
Professor Klemperer in early 1922 had not implausibly proposed 
that his troubles might stem from lead-poisoning brought about by the 
two bullets still trapped in his head after the assassination attempt. One 
of these was removed by surgery on 23 April 1922 in the 
Soldatenkovski Hospital in Moscow. 18 In advance of the operation, 
Lenin had yielded a little to his doctors' recommendations by agreeing 
to reduce his workload. 19 On ll April he had returned to his project for 
the re-organisation of Sovnarkom in his temporary absence. As 
previously, he wanted to divide the various People's Commissariats 
into two groups and to allot one group to Rykov and the other to 
Tsyurupa. The novelty was that Lenin now urged that Rykov and 
Tsyurupa should use the Workers' and Peasants' Inspectorate (or 
Rabkrin) as their main administrative apparatus of supervision.20 
Trotski gave a scathing response. He despised Rabkrin as well as its 
chairman Stalin; he also reasoned against Lenin that the proposal in 
general depended excessively on amicable relations existing between 
Rykov and Tsyurupa. Lenin was simply juggling with personalities and 
inter-institutional rules whereas, according to Trotski, the solution to 
the chaos in economic policy and its implementation was to elevate the 
State Planning Commission to the position of supreme control over 
industrial investment and production.21 
The sole full member of the Politburo to approve Lenin's scheme was 
Kamenev.22 Lenin irritatedly replied on 5 May, defending Rabkrin and 
rejecting Trotski's demands about the State Planning Commission.23 It 
was a complicated disagreement. If Trotski had a correct perception of 
the weakness of the scheme Lenin advocated, Lenin was right to 
speculate that Trotski was using the occasion to trundle out old hobby-
horses from their stables. 
Trotski and Lenin argued as if it could be taken for granted that 
Lenin would shortly return to his political jobs. The scheme proposed 
by him was carefully limited to the matter of his Sovnarkom deputies 
 260 
Lenin: A Political Life 
and their functions. He thereby implied that he would always be in 
ultimate command and that his incapacity would be temporary. Not 
even his stroke on 25 May 1922 changed his attitude, and Lenin was 
determined to resume his full duties with all speed. His doctors did not 
discourage him in his ultimate aim; none seems to have appreciated the 
gravity of his condition.24 They insisted, however, that he should not 
return to work until such time as his health had drastically improved. 
This was evidently going to involve many weeks. He remained at Gorki 
the entire summer, and this time there were to be no trips to Moscow 
and to his office in the Kremlin; he had to content himself with being 
visited by friends and associates and being tended by his wife 
Krupskaya and his sister Mariya.25 His recuperative capacity 
surprised the medical staff. By 13 July he was writing to his secretary 
Lidiya Fotieva: 'You can congratulate me on my recovery. The proof: 
my handwriting, which is beginning to become human.'26 He hustled 
his doctors into letting him read newspapers again. He even began to 
hold forth to his colleagues about their own medical problems. In late 
August he instructed A. I. Sviderski not to return to Moscow political 
life until after mastering the use of his new false teeth and becoming 
fully fit again. The Russian Socialist Federal Soviet Republic's most 
reluctant f.atient advised other patients to take their own convalescence 
seriously. 7 
Lenin, his bossy exuberance and his eye for detail restored to him, 
planned to re-enter political activity and its intensity. His hopes were 
misplaced. The stroke of 25 May had been of major dimensions and, as 
Professor Osipov indicated, had probably occurred at the end of a 
sequence of several lighter strokes. Each of them stemmed from a 
sudden inadequate supply of blood, known as ischaemia, to the 
brain. 28 His symptoms, as manifested in mid-1922, seemed to Osipov to 
constitute a classic case of atherosclerosis: the clogging up of the 
arteries with a fatty material which has a fibrous covering and forms a 
sort of plaque within the arteries. 
Other hypotheses were confidentially canvassed within the medical 
fraternity. The most extraordinary was the possibility that the bullets 
from the August 1918 attempt on his life had been tipped with poison. 
This made good copy for Pravda, but the doctors no sooner had 
debated it than they rejected it. Whereas a South American Indian who 
smears his arrow with curare can shoot a deadly substance into the 
body of his intended victim, a Russian Socialist Revolutionary would 
have burned off the toxin simply by firing the gun.29 Even so, it cannot 
be wholly discounted that the attempted assassination had caused 
 Testament to a Revolution 
261 
lasting serious damage. The black-outs he had suffered in the Civil 
War, for example, may have been signs of an epilepsy induced by the 
bullets. It remains possible, too, that Klemperer's removal of the bullet 
disturbed the brain again and brought about the major stroke a few 
weeks later. Another hypothesis was that Lenin was suffering merely 
from massive over-work. No doubt his workload reinforced the 
symptoms; but the majority opinion among Lenin's doctors was surely 
right to reject the idea that therein lay the basic cause of the disease 
(even though this did not prevent Politburo from touting it in the press 
in order to reinforce the Bolshevik leader's image as a self-sacrificing 
benefactor of Soviet society).30 
There was another potential diagnosis which the Politburo withheld 
from public deliberations: namely that Lenin had syphilis. Rumours to 
this effect were already doing the rounds in Moscow, and continued in 
subsequent years. 31 It cannot be ruled out that a sexual liaison before 
the Revolution infected him or that he inherited syphilis from his 
father. The questions asked of him by the specialists show that the 
same thought had occurred to them.32 Nevertheless Lenin also 
impressed them with his naivete about such a possibility even though 
he made an effort to consult lots of medical textbooks so as to diagnose 
himself. 33 Many symptoms indeed point away from syphilis as the 
principal cause. Lenin had had problems since he had been a young 
man; and yet the onset of strokes to sufferers of syphilis usually occurs 
within fifteen years of the original infection. Furthermore, periods of 
remission from the progressive paralysis are typically few whereas 
Lenin had Jed a normal life for most of his career.34 Professor 
A verbakh inspected him in 1922 and found no significant defect in his 
eyes3s In addition, Lenin experienced hallucinations in the later stages 
of his disease. 36 Such phenomena are hard to reconcile with a diagnosis 
of syphilis. On the other hand, it may be that Lenin had had some 
extra-marital liaison more recently, perhaps even since the October 
Revolution, and that Averbakh's test was unable to detect a syphilitic 
condition in its early stages. As yet we cannot say beyond peradventure 
that Lenin was not suffering from it. 
No wonder his doctors were perplexed. He could easily have been the 
victim of more than one illness; and not all his medical difficulties were 
necessarily linked to the disease which eventually killed. Even now the 
identity of this disease cannot be stated with certainty. Nevertheless, 
while several hypotheses cannot be definitively repudiated, the evidence 
on balance suggests that his principal affliction in mid-1922 is likely to 
have been an hereditary weakness resulting in atherosclerosis. 
 262 
Lenin: A Political Life 
Atherosclerosis, which is one of the forms of what is still commonly 
referred to as arteriosclerosis or 'hardening of the arteries', is often 
associated with hypertension. This occurs when there is persistent high 
pressure of blood against the arterial walls. Research has linked 
hypertension, moreover, to various types of person. He or she may be 
obese or eat too much salt or smoke nicotine. It is true that Vladmir 
Ilich Lenin was stocky rather than fat and that he was militantly anti-
smoking. Admittedly, too, we have no information about how much 
salt went into his diet). But other characteristics fit him closely. 
Hypertension is strongly associated with heredity - and Lenin's father 
had died of a brain haemorrhage; and his siblings died from analogous 
conditions. Hypertension also tends to affect both those with an 
aggressive, hyperactive temperament and those working in a stressful 
environment.37 This perfectly characterised Lenin's circumstances. He 
had had various medicaments for his symptoms, but the worsening 
symptoms before 1921 had not been treated with the principal 
measures that might have prevented a stroke: a protracted rest and a 
permanent withdrawal from activities involving stress. Nothing short 
of his retirement from politics would have sufficed, and even then there 
would have been no assurance of effective prevention. There was no 
known cure for atherosclerosis- and none exists today. After Lenin's 
major stroke had taken place, furthermore, the chances of recovery had 
greatly narrowed; and they were rendered exiguous in the extreme by 
his resolve to resume his duties just as soon as the initial debilitation 
had disappeared. His thinking was medically disastrous. Lenin's 
affected arteries were linked to the brain, and the major stroke was a 
sign that a worse one might yet occur. 
Yet Lenin simply could not understand a life outside politics. Even if 
he had retired and taken up study and writing, political questions 
would have dominated his mind. One of his exasperated doctors 
exclaimed: 'Just you try and stop a silkworm weaving his thread.'38 
Nor would his thinking on politics have been more measured and 
restrained. Strokes paralysing the right side of the body may 
simultaneously produce uncontrollable violent alternations of mood. 
Elation can give way to depression, and depression back to elation. The 
patient may laugh or sob for no explicable reason.39 Lenin's policies of 
spring 1922 were savage even by his standards. Bishops and priests 
should be killed, Socialist Revolutionaries and Mensheviks killed, 
fraudulent bureaucrats killed. It was as if he could not control himself; 
and perhaps this was instinctively felt by those colleagues who 
moderated the measures he demanded at the time.40 
 Testament to a Revolution 
263 
The nature of this medico-political linkage resists conclusive 
analysis. In particular, the hundreds of pages of accounts kept by his 
doctors after his stroke contain information written within the 
framework of assumptions superseded by decades of clinical science's 
development. Nevertheless one salient fact requires consideration. This 
is that the violent changes of mood did not develop for the first time in 
the last years of his life. Nikolai Valentinov, who had known the 
Bolshevik leader in Switzerland, was impressed by the similarity 
between his own memory of the Lenin at the turn of the century and 
the memoirs by Bolshevik leaders about the Lenin who had suffered a 
major stroke. Valentinov also noted that, in the pre-revolutionary 
years, it was usually a crisis in politics which precipitated the elation or 
the depression in Lenin.41 The contemporary intra-party situation 
seemed to influence his physical condition. This by no stretch of the 
imagination means that the disease originated in politics. The 
interpretation is rather that his symptoms were aggravated by his 
public concerns, and that the chemistry of his condition would have 
existed regardless of his political involvement. As his health worsened, 
furthermore, the vehemence of his political declarations increased. In 
mid-1922 he was consequently in no mood to be crossed by friend or 
foe about the slightest aspect of his version of the New Economic 
Policy. 
THE FOREIGN TRADE CONTROVERSY 
The first object of his wrath was the proposal, first made by Vladimir 
Milyutin who until then had been close to Lenin in his thinking, to 
repeal the state monopoly on foreign trade which had been introduced 
on 22 April 1918. Lenin had always thought that the New Economic 
Policy would involve severe restrictions upon the influence of 
capitalists.42 But industrial recovery was slow. The flow of capital 
into the country through the signature of concessionary agreements 
was negligible. The various trade treaties obtained by the Russian 
Socialist Federal Soviet Republic were encouraging; but the unilateral 
abrogation of the debts contracted by Nikolai II and the Provisional 
Government had inhibited potential investment. 
Several leading Bolsheviks began to argue that the business of 
imports and exports therefore be partially denationalised. Milyutin, as 
Soviet representative at the Baltic economic talks in the Latvian capital 
of Riga in late October 1921, learned how reluctant were foreign 
 264 
Lenin: A Political Life 
entrepreneurs to do their deals only with the Soviet government; and he 
found support from Kamenev for the idea that, if imports of private 
foreign capital were to be allowed through the projected concessions, 
there were no ideological or practical reasons for prohibiting private 
import and export of goods. The People's Commissariat of Foreign 
Trade was criticised for its inefficiencies. If a repeal was not allowed, 
Milyutin asserted, smuggling on a massive scale would occur.43 Lenin, 
while not denying that the Commissariat was highly bureaucratic, was 
appalled by talk of denationalisation. With the support of Leonid 
Krasin, People's Commissar for Foreign Trade, he had secured the 
rejection of Milyutin's proposal by the Politburo on 10 November 
1921.44 Other figures in the party leadership rallied to Milyutin. For 
instance, Finance Commissar G. Y. Sokolnikov argued that private 
exports should be permitted so long as they involved payment in the 
form of foodstuffs which would be brought back into the country. 
Lenin objected in writing to Kamenev that there was nothing wrong 
with the monopoly if only adequate 'terror' were to be applied to those 
foreigners who were 'buying up our officials with bribes' .45 
By early March 1922 he had appeared to have won;46 but already on 
15 May he was worried enough to write to Stalin as General Secretary 
of the Central Committee requesting the Politburo's approval for a 
directive confirming the monopoly.47 The rumblings inside the party 
leadership in favour of repeal were said by N. N. Krestinski, the Soviet 
diplomatic plenipotentiary in Berlin, to be inducing businessmen to 
delay making potential deals with the Soviet government. The 
Politburo accepted Lenin's request on 22 May - only three days 
before his major stroke.48 
Yet Kamenev and Bukharin were unpersuaded by his arguments; 
and even Stalin, who agreed to the issuance of the directive, had come 
to believe that 'a weakening of the monopoly would become inevitable' 
(as he remarked on his copy of Lenin's letter).49 Lenin's summer 
convalescence gave the proponents of denationalisation their chance. 
On 8 August, in his absence, the People's Commissariat of Foreign 
Trade was discussed by the Central Committee. Trotski, like Lenin, 
was hostile to the repeal of the state monopoly. He favoured the 
making of a public announcement that the monopoly would stay in 
force; but, after much debate, he was defeated. 5° If Lenin and Trotski 
had trusted each other better, things might have been different. But the 
central party leaders in any case needed to determine policy one way or 
the other. At Kamenev's instigation, foreign trade came before the 
Politburo yet again on 7 September. 51 Sensitivity, perhaps even dread, 
 Testament to a Revolution 
265 
about Lenin's opinions persisted, and the Politburo decided a week 
later to keep Lenin closely informed about the latest shifts in its 
policy.'2 Possibly Kamenev had sensed the possibility that Lenin might 
be about to abandon his own position. Negotiations between Krasin 
and the British metallurgical firm of Urquhart had led to a draft 
contract. On 12 September, Lenin wrote to the Politburo brusquely 
urging that the People's Commissariat of Foreign Trade should be 
ignored. Krasin, he declared, had envisaged a concession which was 'a 
cabal and a daylight robbery'. ' 3 
Presumably Kamenev concluded that the draft contract demon-
strated that the People's Commissariat would always be less competent 
than the private sector. Lenin, however, did not make this inference. 
For him, the episode confirmed the desirability of applying greater 
control over the activities and personnel of the People's Commissariat 
of Foreign Trade. The controversy was bound to erupt as soon as he 
succeeded in participating more closely in the deliberations of the 
central party leadership. The advocates of the repeal of the state 
monopoly ignored his wishes at their peril. On 6 October the Central 
Committee plenum again considered the topic of imports and 
exports.S4 
There the People's Commissar of Finances, G. Y. Sokolnikov, made 
a subtle proposal by demanding only a partial repeal. He cautiously 
limited himself to calling for 'temporary permission for imports and 
exports in particular categories of goods or with application to 
particular frontiers'." Lenin could not attend the plenum, but 
contacted participants including Stalin and Trotski. He wrote, too, 
to the Central Committee on 13 October, repeating his critical 
innuendoes about Sokolnikov (who was said to be a 'lover of 
paradox') and claiming that the decision had been imposed on a tired 
Central Committee which was ill-informed and would have 'voted for 
anything after a few minutes e basta'. Lenin argued that to open the 
ports of Petrograd and Novorossiisk would immediately lead to the 
country being devoid of flax, which was worth three times as much 
abroad, and would deprive the existing inflow of gold bullion to the 
Commissariat of Finances through sales of Russian raw materials. 
Excise duties would not bring in the amount of revenues expected by 
Sokolnikov. But the major reason for keeping the monopoly, according 
to Lenin, would be the likelihood that the peasantry would otherwise 
defy the government. Since its inception, he had stressed that the New 
Economic Policy should involve the maintenance of state control over 
trade; and he saw terrible dangers in any lessening of control: 'A 
 266 
Lenin: A Political Life 
specialist-smuggler at the frontier is one thing; but it is entirely another 
matter to have the entire peasantry which will defend itself as a whole 
and fight against any authority trying to deprive it of its "own" 
profit'.s6 
Lenin, sensing that he could not quickly overturn Sokolnikov's 
proposal, called for a postponement of implementation for two whole 
months.s7 Stalin was by then entirely on the side of Milyutin and 
Sokolnikov; and not only Kamenev but also Zinoviev and Bukharin 
were firmly convinced that 'the Old Man' had got it wrong and that the 
economy's desperate condition necessitated the repeal.s8 But Stalin led 
the way by telling the Central Committee, as its General Secretary, that 
he was willing to retreat in the face of Lenin's 'insistent proposal'. After 
consulting the other members, he announced the postponement 
requested by Lenin.s9 
Active supporters of Lenin in the party leadership's front rank were 
few. Only Krasin, whose objections were now circulated to all Central 
Committee members with Stalin's consent, backed him.60 In normal 
health, Lenin could have managed in this situation; and indeed he was 
sufficiently recovered to take the chair at meetings again. On 12 
October 1922 he had participated directly in a Politburo session. Next 
day he led the discussions at the Council of Labour and Defence. On 17 
October he took his place in Sovnarkom.61 The old routines were being 
resumed. In deference to medical advice he intercalated extra 'rest days' 
into his working week; but even this particular self-restraint ceased in 
the following month.62 He was so resilient that on 15 November he 
insisted on receiving seven separate visitors. One of them, the Italian 
communist Amadeo Bordiga, discussed European politics with him for 
an hour and forty minutes.63 Lenin also made public appearances, 
most notably at the Fourth Congress of the Communist International 
on 13 November when he gave a lengthy address.64 A week later he 
spoke to the Moscow Soviet.6s His spirits rose; his recovery seemed at 
least a possibility despite all his gloominess in the summer. Delegates to 
the Communist International Congress who had not seen him before 
were surprised by his vigour on the platform. As the Congress drew to 
its close, Lenin began to contemplate the debate on foreign trade 
postponed until the forthcoming Central Committee plenum 
Nevertheless signs had been visible in previous weeks that he was not 
as well as he seemed. At Sovnarkom on 24 October, as Kamenev 
noticed, Lenin had criticised a draft law without realising that he had 
lost his place in his notes; he had even read aloud the same passage 
twice. Kamenev, Stalin and Zinoviev met to discuss his condition and 
 Testament to a Revolution 
267 
concluded, understatedly, that 'Vladimir Ilich easily gets tired and 
obviously gets over-tired'.66 A month later their concerns were proved 
realistic. The severe aches and pains returned on 25 November, and 
Lenin was incapacitated. The duty secretary's report was clipped and 
to the point: 'Vladimir Ilich is ill, he was in the office for only five 
minutes, dictated three letters by telephone, to which he wanted to have 
replies at a later date. Mariya Ilinichna [Lenin's sister] said not to 
bother him with anything- and that, if he himself enquires after the 
answers, to ask whomever is appropriate. No receptions, no errands in 
the mean while.'67 The doctors this time were successful in their 
insistence: Lenin was to stop work absolutely for a whole week.68 
He did not comply at all. He still used the phone, and there were few 
days when he did not come into the office.69 Reviewing their patient's 
condition on Sunday, 2 December 1922, again the doctors insisted: he 
was to ease down his rota of duties. He was forbidden to chair the 
Politburo on Tuesday and was allowed to do so only briefly on 
Thursday; and it was stated that he should go off to Gorki for a few 
days' rest immediately afterwards.70 Lenin was a tough old bird and in 
fact kept on working; but on 13 December, at eleven o'clock in the 
morning, his doctors advised that he would be seriously at risk if his 
disobedience continued. Total rest was prescribed.71 Lenin obeyed, but 
only after arranging contingency measures for the Central Committee 
plenum. His contacts over the previous six weeks, when he had seen 
and written to every Politburo member, indicated that he could not 
count on victory in the controversy over the state foreign-trade 
monopoly. Krasin would not suffice as an ally. By midday on 12 
December Lenin had made up his mind to ask Trotski for support.72 
First he sent a brief note.73 To Lenin's delight, Trotski replied 
positively the same day.74 The old difficulties remained. Trotski argued 
that all foreign trade should be placed under the authority of the State 
Planning Commission so that the revenues from import and exports 
could be channelled directly into industrial capital investment.7s For 
Lenin, this was too reminiscent of War Communism for comfort; and, 
on 13 December, he persuaded Trotski that they could lay this 
particular issue aside while campaigning in common for the retention 
and strengthening of the state foreign-trade monopoly.76 
By 15 December he rejoiced: 'I consider that we have reached total 
agreement. I ask you to announce our solidarity at the plenum.'77 The 
reactions of the other Politburo members can well be imagined. Their 
relief that they would not have to face him in the Central Committee 
was lessened by the discovery that the proxy defender of the monopoly 
 268 
Lenin: A Political Life 
would be not Krasin, whose People's Commissariat of Foreign Trade 
was acknowledged even by Lenin to have its faults, but by Trotski. 
Lenin had turned the tables on them. 
The Central Committee was to consider the premises of foreign trade 
on 18 December. Lenin sent it a letter rejecting the criticisms ofKrasin 
made by Bukharin, who had emerged as the theorist among those 
calling for the abolition of the state monopoly. It is striking how 
similar were Lenin's arguments to those he had used in inaugurating 
the New Economic Policy. He continued to believe that the 
maintenance of the government's economic control was vital. If 
private trade abroad were to be allowed, he asserted, the exporter 
would 'mobilise around himself the entire peasantry in the fastest, 
surest and unequivocal fashion'. Only the interests of 'the speculator, 
the petit bourgeois and the higher sections of the peasantry' would be 
served; and, when flax sold for fourteen roubles in Russia and for only 
four and a half roubles in Britain, it was easy to predict an outflow of 
crucially-needed raw materials from the country. Control, control, 
contro11711 On 15 December Lenin, pleased with his work, wrote to 
Stalin and emphasised that his own absence should not be allowed to 
deflect the Central Committee from a final decision on foreign trade: 'I 
have now completed the winding up of my affairs and can calmly 
depart.' Zinoviev and Stalin had already indicated that they would not 
oppose Lenin's standpoint on foreign trade, and Lenin had heard that 
Kamenev was rumoured to feet likewise. The Central Committee duly 
confirmed a dutiful proposal by Zinoviev for the retention of the state 
monopoly.79 From the sanatorium a message was sent to Trotski on 21 
December: 'It is as if we've succeeded by a simple movement of 
manoeuvre in capturing a position without having to fire a shot.'80 
FRIENDS AND COMRADES 
The formation of the Lenin-Trotski alliance confounded the hopes of 
Stalin and Zinoviev of excising Trotski from the core of the central 
party leadership. Nothing had seemed so unlikely earlier in the year. 
Trotski had been highly suspect to Lenin since the 'trade union 
controversy', and Stalin had been among Lenin's most valuable 
supporters in limiting the influence of the party's left wing.81 
Lenin's health problems in the winter of 1921-1922 had pushed him 
closer and closer to Stalin. Until then he had been able to control the 
Politburo and the Central Committee through the presence of his 
 Testament to a Revolution 
269 
personality and persuasive skill. But an adjutant was required to run 
the party machinery in the provinces. Vyacheslav Molotov was 
politically more reliable for Lenin than his trio of predecessors: 
Krestinski, Serebryakov and Preobrazhenski. But Molotov did not 
enjoy the local party respect crucial for keeping the party together.82 
Lenin needed a new Sverdlov, and he thought Stalin would fit the bill 
despite the unsettled relations between them in the past. Before the 
February Revolution Lenin, despite describing him as 'the wonderful 
Georgian',83 had conflicted with him over the State Duma, over the 
party's agrarian policy, over relations with the Mensheviks; and in 
1917 Stalin had not initially welcomed The April Theses or the call by 
Lenin, after the 'July Days', to drop the slogan of 'All Power to the 
Soviets'.84 After the October Revolution there continued to be friction 
between them. Lenin and Stalin differed about the prospects of 
European socialist revolution, about the employment of Imperial 
officers in the Red Army and about the 'national question'. In 1920, 
moreover, Lenin had objected to the maverick behaviour of Stalin in 
the Red Army's invasion of Poland. 85 
Consequently it is erroneous to suppose that Lenin was entirely 
ignorant about the kind of politician whose candidacy for appointment 
as General Secretary of the Central Committee he accepted after the 
Eleventh Party Congress.86 In any case, bad blood had not come 
between Lenin and Stalin; as yet their disputes had been kept within the 
bounds of a party which thrived on polemics. Stalin had never been a 
yes-man; he had always been prickly, volatile and rumbustious; he had 
the reputation of an administrator who could impose his will upon any 
recalcitrant organisation. Just such a colleague - a colleague who had 
appeared to concur with Lenin on most fundamental current issues -
was to Lenin's liking as he himself made arrangements for his 
convalescence. 
The purpose of the General Secretaryship, a newly-invented post, 
was to supply its holder with the full authority of the Central 
Committee in overseeing the implementation of central party directives 
and co-ordinating the central party apparatus. It was a substantial job 
for a substantial politician. Naturally it was not meant to accord 
plenipotentiary power. On the contrary, the rule that the Central 
Committee had no permanent chairman remained in place. 87 Molotov 
after the Tenth Party Congress had been designated as 'the responsible 
secretary' of the Central Committee, and the title set him clearly apart 
and a little above the other secretaries. Stalin as General Secretary 
stood high above them. He was already a Politburo member (whereas 
 270 
Lenin: A Political Life 
Molotov had only even become a candidate member when selected as 
'responsible secretary'). Nevertheless the very authoritarian qualities 
which commended Stalin to his allies were uncongenial to others. At 
the Eleventh Party Congress there were several delegates who, when 
filling in their ballot papers for the election to the next Central 
Committee, had specified a wish that Stalin, Molotov and Valeryan 
Kuibyshev should become Central Committee secretaries.88 How many 
delegates did this is unclear, but there were enough of them for their 
unprecedented -
and probably not spontaneous -
action to be 
discussed at the first plenum of the Central Committee after the 
Congress. Kamenev kept to proprieties by explaining both to the 
Congress and the Central Committee that the Central Committee 
plenum did not have to comply with the wishes of 'a certain section of 
delegates' by appointing Stalin. But he obviously wanted this result, 
and the Central Committee indeed duly appointed him.89 
There was also concern lest Stalin's multiple tenure of posts in party 
and government should impede his ability to handle any one of them. 
Preobrazhenski had said as much at the Eleventh Party Congress.90 At 
the plenum of the Central Committee it was Lenin who intervened to 
put minds at rest. On Lenin's initiative, Stalin was asked to find himself 
competent deputies for his jobs in government.91 This was not the 
suggestion of someone who opposed Stalin's appointment. Nor did it 
indicate an underestimation of the potential power of the post. Quite 
the reverse: Lenin thought the General Secretaryship so important that 
its first holder was asked to liberate himself from governmental posts in 
order to discharge his duties. Lenin urged that the time had come for 
the entire Secretariat to be overhauled. Not only Stalin but also the 
other secretaries should devote themselves to internal party affairs, and 
the schedule of the Secretariat's opening hours should be fixed and 
advertised.92 
At first Lenin and Stalin worked enjoyably together. Despite 
yearning to get back to the Kremlin and resume participation in 
Politburo and Sovnarkom meetings, Lenin kept his frustrations in 
check most of the time. An exception occurred in July, when he wrote 
to Kamenev suggesting that the Central Committee should be cut back 
to a membership of three: Molotov, Rykov and Kuibyshev. None of 
these had voting rights in the Politburo. Cheekily Lenin added that the 
Central Committee should have only three candidate members, 
Kamenev, Zinoviev and Tomski.93 Kamenev and Zinoviev, of 
course, were already Politburo members. What he was trying to 
suggest, not too sophisticatedly, was that he did not trust the Politburo 
 Testament to a Revolution 
271 
to run the party in his absence; he was willing to exclude most full 
members of the Central Committee from its ranks- or else, in the case 
of Kamenev, Zinoviev and Tomski, to reduce their status humiliat-
ingly. His pretext was that central party leaders in general were so 
overworked as to endanger their health. Consequently a lengthy period 
of leisure was in order. So, too, was a deceleration of the rate of 
decision-taking. His outward appearance of care masked a determina-
tion that, in his absence, nobody should enact measures he disliked. It 
was almost as if he had decided that, if he was going to be ill, 
practically all of his colleagues should willy nilly have medical ailments 
diagnosed on their behalf. 
It was a dotty scheme. If anyone else had made such a proposal, 
especially if it had involved a loss of operational control by Lenin, he 
would have judged the man insane.94 Lenin on this occasion was 
ignored by his colleagues. His behaviour was reported to the rest of the 
Politburo, and the matter was dropped. If they had been feeling 
uncharitable, they, might have concluded that their leader was 
behaving rather like a spoiled child accustomed to getting his way. 
Instead they assumed that this was quirkiness induced by illness; and 
Lenin, for his part, came to recognise that he would not succeed by 
ranting. He had to win colleagues over to his viewpoint. A degree of 
self-restraint was therefore crucial. 
In particular, his aim was to avoid offending Stalin, whom he had 
left ofT his proposed list of members for the diminished Central 
Committee:95 tantrums could not be afforded. Lenin liaised by phone 
and letter with Stalin. For his part, Stalin saw the sense in travelling out 
to Gorki for direct consultations. He wished to allay any suspicion 
harboured by Lenin that the Politburo was doing things which, if he 
had been fit, would have incurred Lenin's displeasure. No Bolshevik 
leader saw Lenin in summer 1922 more than did Stalin. Between July 
and September the two met nine times.96 Bukharin and Kamenev were 
also visitors but, strangely in view of their past collaboration,97 
Zinoviev appeared only once: possibly his Petrograd responsibilities 
limited his ability to do more than pay fleeting visits to Moscow.98 
Stalin cut a jovial figure with Lenin out at Gorki; he was an excellent 
mimic and raconteur when the mood was upon him, and cracked jokes 
while they discussed politics.99 Lenin put Stalin at his ease. When 
knowing that the General Secretary was about to arrive, he would 
quietly request his sister Mariya to place a bottle of wine at Stalin's 
disposal. The two of them got on famously. When Lenin suggested that 
police surveillance should be instituted on his doctors, Stalin took this 
 272 
Lenin: A Political Life 
as the sign of a return to health. 100 There was no Politburo member 
more vigilant for conspiracy and sabotage than Stalin, who was 
delighted to find a congenial spirit in Lenin. 
The only notable discomfiture in the conversations between Lenin 
and Stalin was not of Stalin's making. Lenin, frequently despairing of 
making a full recovery, asked Stalin for poison. Ever since Marx's son-
in-law Paul Lafargue had committed suicide in 1911, the Bolshevik 
leader had been determined that he would do likewise if ever his health 
became similarly beyond hope of repair. Krupskaya and Lenin had 
talked about this at the time. 101 
In May and June 1922 he was intermittently convinced that his 
recovery would either not occur or would not last if it did. But he did 
not turn for a cyanide capsule, his preferred mode of self-extinction, to 
his wife or to his sister. Instead he turned to Stalin. 102 Stalin agreed to 
do his bidding. Why had Lenin chosen his political colleague for this 
mission? According to Mariya Ulyanova, it was because he had no 
rival as 'a person who was as hard as steel and devoid of any 
sentimentality'. 103 So much for the idea that the scales tumbled from 
Lenin's eyes as regards Stalin's personality only at the very end of 19221 
Another conversation proved how hard the Georgian Bolshevik really 
was. In one of his several reminiscences about old adversaries, Lenin 
spoke fondly about Yuli Martov. Lenin and Martov had belonged to 
the same St Petersburg Marxist organisation in the 1890s; they had 
founded the newspaper Iskra together in the emigration in 1900. 
Subsequently they had fallen out: Lenin the Bolshevik struggled 
against Martov the Menshevik. Now Lenin heard that his former 
comrade was ill and destitute in Berlin, and asked Stalin as General 
Secretary to see that financial assistance was dispatched to him. Stalin 
immediately retorted: 'What, start wasting money on an enemy of the 
working class! Find yourself another secretary for that.' Lenin was 
both distraught and angry at such an attitude; but it was this attitude 
that made Stalin the man who would be most likely to indulge the 
request for the capsule of cyanide.104 
And yet even Stalin was unsure of himself. The conversation had 
lasted only five minutes, and was the second time when Lenin had 
extracted the promise. 105 As he left Lenin's bedside and went into the 
small ante-room, he accosted Mariya Ulyanova and Nikolai Bukharin. 
Revealing what had passed between him and Lenin, he asked them 
what he should do. Their firm response was that Stalin should retract 
his promise. Stalin agreed, and he returned to Lenin and fibbed that he 
had consulted the doctors again and had been told that 'all was not 
 Testament to a Revolution 
273 
lost'. Lenin perked up a little at this and asked: 'Are you up to some 
cunning?'. Stalin answered with a question of his own: 'When have you 
seen me being cunning?' 106 
Naturally Lenin had seen many displays of cunning from Stalin over 
the years; their joint machinations in the Bolshevik faction before 1917 
and in the Soviet government after the October Revolution can have 
left him with few illusions. They continued to get on well. Stalin and he 
talked often about the political threat posed by Trotski. 107 It is hard to 
resist the conclusion that Lenin stilt believed that he could use Stalin as 
his trusty adjutant. Privately he was condescending about his Georgian 
colleague; and, when Mariya Ulyanova drew attention to Stalin's 
cleverness, Lenin the ex-emigre writer and theorist stupidly replied: 'He 
is far from being intetligent.'108 Such a misperception of Stalin's mental 
capacities was common enough to the intellectuals of Bolshevism. The 
humiliation felt by Stalin reinforced his determination to wreak a 
terrible revenge on them when the opportunity came. He himself had 
always had ambitions as a theorist as well as an administrator, and 
evidently thought his writings on the national question to be a 
substantial contribution to a growing revolutionary corpus; and, while 
Stalin could not match the flashes of inspiration in the humanities and 
the social sciences displayed by Trotski and Bukharin, there is little in 
the work of Zinoviev, Kamenev, Pyatakov or any other outstanding 
Bolshevik politician which put them out of his intellectual class. And, 
quite apart from Stalin's qualities as a theorist, it was fatuous for Lenin 
to refer to him so casually as unintelligent. 
Lenin's overt friendliness to Stalin was anyway predicated upon 
need. Without Stalin, he could not control Trotski. But the disputes 
with Stalin over policies on foreign trade and on other matters reversed 
the situation: Trotski was needed in order to control the ever more 
rampant Stalin. Zinoviev had long since ceased being a close 
adjutant. 109 The foreign-trade controversy, moreover, had shown 
Zinoviev and Kamenev to have come close to Stalin politically. 110 
Kamenev's refusal to pick up the anti-Stalin banner was the final 
inducement for Lenin to turn towards Trotski. Mariya Ulyanova 
watched the situation closely, knowing that the switch in her brother's 
affections characteristically resulted from what she tactfully called 
'diplomacy'. 111 He had never liked Trotski, but pragmatic calculation 
overruled his emotions. Their past disagreements had once provoked 
Trotski to shout at Lenin that he was a 'hooligan' at a Politburo 
meeting. Lenin had turned 'white as chalk' but only muttered that 
'someone's nerves seem to be playing them up'. 112 This self-restraint 
 274 
Lenin: A Political Life 
might now pay dividends. Lenin was acquainted with Trotski's vanity. 
His insistence on writing about himself in the third person in his 
memoirs on 1917 fooled no one: Trotski's self-abasement was a method 
for attracting public admiration. 113 It was the general experience that 
Trotski was a poor member of any collective. Lenin was choosing him 
in the absence of a sensible and reliable alternative and was giving no 
guarantee that, should his own health be restored to him, he would not 
revert to a more cautious relationship. He also knew that Trotski was 
not as confident as he appeared. Trotski had even refused to lead the 
People's Commissariat of Internal Affairs in 1917 on the grounds that 
a Jew could not hold such a post in a country notorious for 
antisemitism. 114 No doubt he used this as a pretext for avoiding jobs 
he simply did not fancy. But the very fact that Trotski talked in this 
fashion was probably a sign that strong traces of diffidence were 
detectable in his arrogant character. He had his greatest impact when 
working with the approval of Lenin. The October Revolution and the 
Civil War had brought them together, and Lenin was inviting Trotski 
to resume close collaboration. 
THE GEORGIAN AFFAIR 
Lenin's rumblings in the dispute over foreign trade were a pallid 
rehearsal of his volcanic eruption about the new Constitution. A 
Congress of Soviets was due to be held in late December, and its 
proceedings were expected to define the relations between Russia and 
the other Bolshevik-led republics of the former Russian empire. The 
Politburo's need in 1921 had been to implement the New Economic 
Policy and to secure political control, but the inter-republican 
constitutional problem could not be permanently ignored; and Lenin 
and Stalin remained as divided as in 1920 about the shape of the future 
links among all the Soviet republics from the Arctic to the Black Sea. 
Lenin still desired a multi-republican federation wherein the Russian 
Socialist Federal Soviet Republic was a constituent republic alongside 
the other Soviet republics; Stalin continued to call for the other Soviet 
republics simply to be pulled into the Russian Socialist Federal Soviet 
Republic with rights of regional autonomy. 115 Nothing had happened 
in the interim to change the mind of either protagonist. Tensions 
between Moscow and the non-Russian republics increased in 1921-
1922, with Ukraine and Georgia being especially annoyed by the 
provisions of the treaties they had signed with the RSFSR. To Lenin, 
 Testament to a Revolution 
275 
this showed the correctness of his project for a multirepublican 
federation; to Stalin, it demonstrated the opposite: namely that Soviet 
rule would be in danger unless the various republics were pulled 
directly into the RSFSR and subjected to tighter control. 
Temporarily, however, there was little conflict between them. In 
particular, they concurred about Georgia. The Georgian Bolsheviks 
strenuously objected to Stalin's proposal that the Georgian republic 
should be incorporated in a Transcaucasian Federation (which in turn 
would enter the RSFSR). Remembering Lenin's call for sensitivity to 
be shown by the party and the armed forces after Georgia's conquest, 
they wrote to him in supplication. If Stalin was impervious to their 
pleas, then surely Lenin would help them. 
But Lenin proved, to their astonishment, to be as unsympathetic; the 
person who in 1921 had intimated a willingness for a rapprochement 
between Bolshevism and Menshevism in Georgia turned a deaf ear to 
them. 116 Both Lenin and Stalin were suspicious of Azeri, Armenian 
and Georgian nationalism. The Armenian-Azerbaidzhani dispute had 
reinforced the notion that, if left to themselves, the republics of the 
Transcaucasus would each succumb to the chauvinistic bacillus. 117 A 
regional federal authority should be able to forestall inter-republican 
strife; and, much as the Georgian Bolshevik leaders felt done down by 
this, they had not always shown attitudes typical of socialist 
internationalism. They had exploited the logistical position of Tbilisi 
in the region's transport system to the obvious detriment of the two 
other Transcaucasian republics. Their insistence on keeping a separate 
republican currency had incurred further suspicion; and their direct 
diplomatic relations with Turkey, involving sensitive aspects of foreign 
trade, alarmed Moscow further. The Georgian Bolsheviks had even 
wished to introduce a law on citizenship which would discriminate 
heavily against the several non-Georgian minorities in the republic. 118 
Not even Lenin was yet disposed to take much notice of Budu 
Mdivani's accusations of Muscovite persecution when Sergo Orzhoni-
kidze and Stalin came forward with a proposal for a Transcaucasian 
federation. 119 
Where the Georgian Bolsheviks failed, however, the party leadership 
in Ukraine had some success. Mikhail Frunze, deputy chairman of the 
Ukrainian government, chafed against the limitations on his powers 
because of the Russo-Ukrainian treaty worked out in December 1920, 
and demanded a review of the treaty and its implementation at the 
Politburo meeting of 4 May 1922. 120 A week later the Politburo 
established a commission to investigate the issues; its chairman was to 
 276 
Lenin: A Political Life 
be Frunze. 121 But the Ukrainian party leaders in Kiev refused to wait 
on events. On 16 May, they voted to bypass Moscow and contact all 
the other republics about relations with the RSFSR. 122 Frunze, too, 
was coming to the conclusion that his commission's terms of reference, 
being limited to problems between RSFSR and Ukraine, were 
intolerably restrictive. 123 
The urgency of the need for a general constitutional settlement at last 
become obvious to every Politburo member; and, from Lenin's 
viewpoint, the timing could not have been worse. The trouble caused 
by Frunze and his associates happened barely a week before Lenin's 
stroke. If Lenin was to affect the outcome of discussions, he had to act 
at long range as well as to combat the debilitating effects of his illness. 
Worse still, he was not immediately aware that Stalin was sticking 
militantly to his own proposals. Lenin's guard was lowered by a 
number of factors. His information about Moscow politicking came to 
him to a considerable extent through Stalin. Furthermore, Stalin 
initially did not seem as uncompromising as he later appeared. The 
appointment of Frunze to head the Politburo commission in May 
displayed prima facie evidence that indulgence was being shown to the 
case of the non-Russians. For his part, Stalin avoided controversy for 
as long as possible. There is no sign that Stalin's 'autonomisation' 
project was discussed by Lenin and Stalin at the Gorki sanatorium in 
the summer. The result was that, despite their vehement disagreement 
in 1920, Lenin remained confident that Stalin would yield to him: only 
gradually did he conclude that the General Secretary was not only 
intransigent but even devious on the matter. 
After the Russo-Ukrainian flurry and Lenin's stroke the question 
was again pushed into the background. Only on 10 August, weeks 
before Lenin returned to work in the Kremlin, did the Politburo 
instruct the Orgburo to 'prepare the question of the interrelationships 
between the RSFSR and the independent republics'.' 24 Stalin was the 
Orgburo's most influential figure, and the decision to leave the 
composition of a drafting commission in the hands of the Orgburo was 
almost certainly a device to secrete the decisions away from Lenin. 
Normally the choice of such an important commission would be made 
by the Central Committee or the Politburo. 125 
The Orgburo met on II August and set up a commission consisting 
of a representative from each of the republics as well as the following 
centrally-based leaders: Stalin, V. V. Kuibyshev, G. Y Sokolnikov, S. 
Ordzhonikidze and C. G. Rakovsky. 126 Stalin was deputed to write a 
project for its perusal. 127 This he did, and the commission accepted and 
 Testament to a Revolution 
277 
transmitted it to the central party bodies of the various republics for 
consideration. Stalin's project was briskly to the point: he judged it 
'sensible' for the so-called independent republics to be subsumed within 
the existing Russian Socialist Federal Soviet Republic. Republican 
commissariats of justice, education, agriculture, workers' and peasants' 
control, health and social insurance would continue to be regarded as 
'independent'. Even the commissariats of the interior were added to the 
list. 128 The proviso was that the Cheka could override all decisions 
about security. In addition, all matters of finance, trade, industry, 
security, transport, communications, food supplies and military 
organisation would be handled directly by the Russian Socialist 
Federal Soviet Republic; and no national appellation other than the 
word 'Russian' was to appear in the union's title. 129 
The decks were cleared for a struggle between Lenin and Stalin; and 
Stalin, quite apart from having the advantage of being fit and active, 
felt that he had reason on his side and that the party would support 
him. The memory of Lenin's difficulties on the 'national question' in 
1917-1919,130 when Stalin had been mainly on his side, reinforced 
Stalin's intuition that Lenin would lose this time. Stalin had always 
been a centraliser and a politician who had regarded the concessions to 
nationalism in the Civil War as an involuntary indulgence, or, as he put 
it, mere 'liberalism'.131 A single governmental centre in Moscow was 
his aim. He was in a hurry: he did not even specify the rights to be 
enjoyed in the expanded Russian Socialist Federal Soviet Republic by 
the various republics about to enter it. 132 
All seemed to go well for Stalin at first. The Azerbaidzhan Central 
Committee, led by Stalin's ally Sergei Kirov, approved the scheme in 
general on 11 September. 133 The Armenian Central Committee took 
the same line five days later; and on 16 September the party's 
Transcaucasian Regional Committee confirmed this on behalf of 
Bolsheviks in Armenia, Azerbaidzhan and Georgia. 134 But things were 
already unravelling for Stalin. The Georgian Central Committee had 
riled the Transcaucasian Regional Committee and its leader Ordzho-
nikidze by rejecting Stalin's scheme on 15 September. 135 This was 
blatant opposition, and it followed the Georgians' campaign against 
their inclusion in the Transcaucasian Federation earlier in the year. 136 
Even the Armenian party was less than ecstatic about Stalin's 
proposals, asking that the republics should explicitly be accorded 
'broad autonomy' within the Russian Socialist Federal Soviet Republic 
and that time should be set aside to prepare the population for what 
was to happen. 137 Meanwhile the Belorussian Central Committee 
 278 
Lenin: A Political Life 
evasively called for a constitutional settlement on the basis 'analogous 
to the relations established between the RSFSR and the Ukraine'.138 
This was not the open support expected by Stalin. The Ukrainian 
Central Committee, moreover, curiously failed to discuss his scheme. 139 
There was a tacit reluctance among local Bolsheviks to accept the 
status of mere 'autonomous republics' for their territories. They did not 
want to ape the model of the Bashkir Republic within the Russian 
Socialist Federal Soviet Republic. Nor were they re-assured by private 
contacts with Stalin, who denied the need for a code of political rights 
for the republics. 140 
Stalin's troubles worsened as Lenin intervened on the side of the 
objectors. Quite when he asked for the materials to be dispatched to the 
Gorki sanatorium is unknown; but probably it was after the middle of 
the month. Stalin was worried enough to write to him in self-
justification on 22 September, explaining that the existing system of 
governance was really in 'sheer chaos'. The various republican 
administrations frequently ignored each other; and, in a nudge at 
Lenin's sentiments about the country's foreign trade, he remonstrated 
that Turkish bankers already had influenced decisions about the 
Georgian economy. Warming to his theme, Stalin asserted that 
nationalism in the peripheral areas would become a threat to the 
regime unless stern measures were quickly taken. He spelled out, as he 
had failed to do in his draft resolution, that he favoured 
'autonomisation' as the solution. 141 
Lenin had apparently been left little time to influence matters. The 
Orgburo commission meanwhile met on 23 September and accepted 
Stalin's project as a basis for further discussion; the dissentient voices 
from the non-Russian republics were cowed into silence. Only the 
Georgian representative Kote Tsintsadze, who deputised for the itt 
Mdivani, dared even to abstain. 142 Mdivani returned next day, 
objecting to the unseemly haste of the decisions already taken. 
Petrovski from the Ukraine was similarly unhappy, and Armenia's 
representative Lukashin was disconcerted by Stalin's brusqueness 
about the rights of the republics in the future federal order. 143 It was at 
this point that Lenin came back into the reckoning. He talked with 
Sokolnikov on 25 September and with Stalin himself for over two 
hours the next day. On both occasions the national question was 
addressed. 144 Stalin was pulled up short. Lenin agreed with the charge 
that Stalin was pressing the accelerator too hard. He also exacted 
changes in the commission's draft. The new federation was to be called 
the Union of Soviet Republics of Europe and Asia and not the Russian 
 Testament to a Revolution 
279 
Socialist Federal Soviet Republic. Indeed the Russian Socialist Federal 
Soviet Republic would join it as one of the several constituent 
republics, and a set of new supreme organs of power would need to be 
established. Stalin agreed to drop his plan for autonomisation; he 
would also slacken the pace of the drafting process so that Lenin could 
participate. 145 
But Stalin proved to be slippery. He and his supporters in the 
commission wrote to Central Committee recommending the formation 
of a Union as demanded by Lenin - and they proposed the Union of 
Soviet Socialist Republics as the title. But their difficulty with the 
Georgians rankled with them, and they quietly revived the idea that 
Armenia, Azerbaidzhan and Georgia should enter the Union as 
members of a Transcaucasian federation and not as separate 
republics. 146 This was bound to lead to trouble. Equally disruptive 
was Stalin's letter to the Politburo on 27 September objecting to the 
establishment of separate legislative organs for the Union of Soviet 
Republics and the Russian Socialist Federal Soviet Republic: a clear 
attempt to re-introduce his old project by the back door. 147 
If Stalin underestimated Lenin's determination, others did not. At 
the Politburo on 28 September, Kamenev warned Stalin by memo: 
'IIich has girded himself up for war in defence of independence.'148 
Stalin was undismayed: 'What is required, in my view, is firmness 
against Ilich.' Kamenev commented that resistance would only make 
things worse in the end. Lenin would see to that! Taken slightly aback, 
Stalin scribbled: 'I don't know. Let him do as he thinks sensible.'149 
Lenin had got his tail up. He announced to Kamenev: 'I declare war to 
the very death on Great Russian chauvinism.'150 By this he meant not 
only Russians in his party who overlooked the wishes of the non-
Russians in the general population but also non-Russian Bolsheviks 
who were similarly insensitive. This matter cropped up at the Central 
Committee plenum which began on 6 October. Lenin was well enough 
to attend, but had to withdraw at midday because of toothache. 151 
Mdivani, though disappointed, wrote to Georgia describing how 
vigorously Lenin had put his arguments. 152 Kamenev and Bukharin 
took up the torch from Lenin and denounced the seepage of 
chauvinism into the Soviet state's activities. 153 Nevertheless Stalin 
had made the necessary modifications to his project, giving ground on 
the question of separating of Union and Russian administrative 
organs. The plenum approved of his draft, and set up a further 
commission to formulate a final project for the Congress of Soviets. 
The members included Stalin, Kamenev, Pyatakov, Rykov, Chicherin 
 280 
Lenin: A Political Life 
and Kalinin as well as representatives from each of the non-Russian 
republics. 154 
Stalin in any case saw that Lenin was not properly recovered. When 
Lenin returned to chair Sovnarkom on 3 October, an agreement held 
among its members to avoid controversy lest he become agitated. (In 
fact he became a lot more agitated because of this plot of gentility 
against himl)155 Stalin also knew that the Georgian Bolshevik leaders' 
hostility to being included in a Transcaucasian federation still cut no 
ice with Lenin. The campaign against them in Tbilisi was maintained. 
Stalin's ally Beso Lominadze was sent by him from Petrograd to 
become Georgian Central Committee secretary. 156 Open season was 
declared on the Mdivani group. 157 At a meeting of the Transcaucasian 
Regional Committee of the Bolshevik party, Ordzhonikidze referred to 
them as 'chauvinistic filth' .158 The Mdivani group's complaint reached 
Lenin's ears, but he replied that he was amazed at the improper tone of 
their criticisms of Ordzhonikidze. If there was a problem, he suggested, 
then the Secretariat should handle it. 159 Stalin enjoyed himself, calling 
on Ordzhonikidze to 'punish' the Georgian Central Committee by 
transferring its recalcitrant members to posts outside Georgia. 
Ordzhonikidze delightedly complied, referring to the Georgian 
Bolshevik opposition as a 'Menshevik deviation' .160 The Georgian 
Central Committee then took a step unprecedented in the ~arty's 
history: most of its members resigned en masse on 22 October. 61 
The collective resignation had little effect at the time. Lenin did not 
sympathise with them, and Kamenev and Bukharin wrote to them 
condemning their action. 162 A new Georgian Central Commmittee was 
appointed from Moscow on 24 October. 163 In vain did the resigners 
write to Lenin protesting the justice of their cause.164 As yet Lenin, 
while not liking Stalin's attitudes, thought that his actions were 
justified. And Stalin showed his guile by acceding to the demand of the 
Georgian Bolshevik dissenters for an investigative mission to be sent to 
Tbilisi. 165 He could not have seemed fairer. But he was stil plotting; the 
Secretariat, under his guidance, suggested that the mission should be 
constituted by Felix Dzierzynski, V. S. Kapsukas-Mickiewicius and 
L. S. Sosnovski. Mdivani was annoyed especially about Sosnovski, and 
secured his removal. 166 His substitute was D. Z. Manuilski: hardly an 
improvement since Manuilski had already helped to stiffen Stalin's 
resolve against making concessions to the so-called nationalists. 167 A 
whitewashing job was being set up in favour of Stalin and 
Ordzhonikidze. The dissentient Georgian Bolsheviks nervously 
awaited their fate. They proclaimed that Stalin was blind to the fact 
 Testament to a Revolution 
281 
that Bolshevism had only the most slender support among Georgians 
in general, that Georgia had had to be conquered and that undying 
national enmity towards Moscow would result from Stalin's constitu-
tional project. No doubt, too, Mdivani and his friends were finding 
after the establishment of 'soviet power' that their own international-
ism was suffused with a national pride. In Tblisi the tension grew. 
A small incident in the Georgian capital in late November 1922 
changed the balance of political forces. A. I. Rykov, one of Lenin's 
deputies in Sovnarkom, was convalescing there and had Ordzhonikidze 
and Kobachidze, a Mdivani supporter, round for the evening as guests. 
Dispute broke out when Kobachidze accused Ordzhonikidze of riding 
'a white horse' .168 This was a taunt that Stalin's ally was behaving with 
the arrogance of a satrap. Ordzhonikidze, overwrought with all the 
enmity towards him in his native land, flew into a rage and fell upon 
Kobachidze. Kobachidze was no match for him and received a 
beating. 169 
Lenin in Moscow was beginning anyway to see the need to keep an 
eye on Stalin. The General Secretary's behaviour in the debate on 
foreign trade had already irritated him, and Lenin knew about his 
ruthlessness from a variety of Georgian sources. Lenin asked his 
secretaries to find out when Rykov and Dzierzynski, who was also 
already in the Transcaucasus, would return to Moscow.170 The 
Dzierzynski mission started its four-day investigation on 5 Decem-
ber.171 Lenin asked to see Dzierzynski and Rykov, immediately after 
their return, in Moscow on 12 December. Their conversations were 
lengthy. Dzierzynski's report left out many details available to him in 
Tblisi; but the ambience of Lenin's study made him drop his guard and 
he let slip the information about Ordzhonikidze's physical assault on 
Kobachidze.172 Lenin was appalled. Nothing which happened in the 
ensuing days reassured him. The report of the Dzierzynski mission was 
accepted by the Orgburo on 21 December, and a decision was taken to 
recall Mdivani, Kavtaradze and their main adherents from work in 
Georgia. 173 Lenin's illness ~revented his attendance at meetings, but he 
started to dictate notes. 1 4 On 28 December he recorded an aide-
memoire with a plan to write a piece 'on the national question and on 
internationalism'. 175 This was initiated on 30 December. The opening 
words were portentous: 'Evidently I am deeply guilty before the 
workers of Russia inasmuch as I failed to intervene with sufficient 
vigour and sufficent sharpness in the notorious question of 
"autonomisation", officially designated, it seems, as the question of 
the union of soviet socialist republics.' 176 
 282 
Lenin: A Political Life 
But it was too late to stop the formation of a Union (which was now 
to be called the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) on the principles 
established with Lenin's consent before the dispatch of Dzierzynski to 
Georgia. A Congress of Soviets in the Transcausasus had overruled the 
objections of the Georgian dissenters; and the Central Committee in 
Moscow on 18 December, welcoming the report of its constitutional 
commission under Stalin, set up yet another for the business of final 
editing. 177 This was ratified at a Congress of Soviets of the Russian 
Socialist Federal Soviet Republic. Fittingly it was Stalin who presented 
it for approval to the First AU-Union Congress of Soviets on 30 
December l 922. 178 The deed was done. The Georgian Bolsheviks had 
been defeated. Ordzhonikidze had got away with his outrageous 
behaviour and Stalin had manoeuvred the Central Committee towards 
a result which, while not giving him exactly what he had originally 
desired, was satisfactory to him. It was the greatest political setback for 
Lenin in his party since before the February Revolution of 1917. 
'LETTER TO THE CONGRESS' 
The abrupt worsening of Lenin's condition on 13 December 1922 
quickened his awareness that he might soon die, and unflinchingly he 
pondered how best to arrange the political succession. The Bolshevik 
party leadership had been casual in drafting legislation; they were 
activists and wanted action, not fine laws which could never be broken. 
They were also collectivists and, although no one doubted that Lenin 
had enjoyed a predominant political position, he had no formal title to 
this effect within the party. Consequently no such title could be 
transferred to a chosen successor. Nor did his colleagues wish to 
appear disloyal by bringing the question of succession into the open. 
Any such demarche would have invited charges of overweening 
personal ambition. 
The only leader who could broach the question was Vladimir Ilich 
Lenin himself, and it was typical of his tough-mindedness that he 
determined to do so. On 23 December 1922 he called Mariya 
Volodicheva to him: 'I want to dictate you a letter to the Congress. 
Take this down!' 179 He had in mind the Twelfth Party Congress, 
scheduled to convene in spring 1923. His courtesies had stayed with 
him and he apologised to Volodicheva for keeping her away from 
public meetings being held in Moscow. He also asked why she looked 
so pale. But his own physical condition was obviously worse than he 
 Testament to a Revolution 
283 
would admit. His memory, too, was weak; he could not even remember 
the date. Exhausted by the first four minutes of dictation, he let Mariya 
go away and resumed his attempt only next afternoon at six o'clock, 
stressing to the secretary that his words on the page were to remain 
'absolutely secret'. 180 The urgent task, he wrote to the forthcoming 
Party Congress, was to raise the authority of the Central Committee. 
He noted that conflicts were already occurring between 'small bits of 
the Central Committee', and suggested that these could be prevented 
from becoming fatal for the party by the simple device of increasing the 
number of Central Committee members to '50 to 100' and stipulating 
that they should come from the working class. His main worry was the 
durability of the party's rule over society in a world of states hostile to 
the Soviet republic. Why the presence of workers would make a 
decisive difference was not explained. Nor was it shown how they 
would acquire the skills to reconcile the clashing 'bits of the Central 
Committee'. Lenin did not even specify how to ensure that the workers 
were chosen on an unbiased basis. The entire proposal was the 
handiwork of unconscious despair. 
Nevertheless his pro-worker utopianism of 1917 had not completely 
left him even after all the disappointments. In the second session of his 
dictation he evidently retained less faith in his colleagues. Addressing 
the topic of 'the parts' of the Central Committee, his language became 
altogether less opaque. Nothing he had written in his career was so 
blunt about people he worked with. His choice of leaders was no less 
remarkable. It would have surprised nobody that Trotski, Zinoviev 
and Kamenev were on his list. Trotski was the renowned co-instigator 
of the October Revolution, Zinoviev headed the Executive Committee 
of the Communist International and Kamenev was chairman of the 
Moscow Soviet. All three were also Politburo members and constantly 
in the public eye. Bukharin's inclusion, too, was no surprise since, 
although he was not a Politburo member, he was Pravda's editor and 
enjoyed broad renown as a theorist and propagandist; he belonged to 
the younger generation in the highest echelons of the party and might 
have been expected to play a role in future dispositions of power. 181 
Yet it remains difficult to understand the references to Pyatakov who 
was only a Central Committee member and deputy chairman of the 
State Planning Commission and was not peeved by his relatively lowly 
condition. 182 Lenin's perspicaciousness was dipping here. Or was it? 
Rykov and Tsyurupa, who had figured in his planning for the re-
organisation of the governmental machinery, were rightly excluded 
from the list even though they were prominent politicians with much 
 284 
Lenin: A Political Life 
current power. Lenin knew that they lacked the weight to affect the 
balance of authority in political conflicts. More acute still was the 
importance he attached to the sixth leader on his list: Stalin. Few 
Bolsheviks outside the Politburo membership would have judged him 
to be any more worthy of inclusion than Pyatakov. To be sure, he was 
General Secretary; but this post was not yet seen to be possessed of 
unchallengeable influence. Stalin, moreover, was thought to lack 
competence as a theorist - a major failing in a Bolshevik leader of that 
epoch. Lenin not only included him but also contended that a clash 
between Stalin and Trotski, 'the two outstanding leaders of the present-
day Central Committee', could even 'lead inadvertently to a schism' in 
the party. It was in order to avoid such an eventuality that he was 
dictating his thoughts with the intention of purveying them to the Party 
Congress. A party split, he asserted, was the greatest threat to the 
survival of the Soviet republic. 183 
None of the six colleagues came out well from Lenin's comments. 
'Comrade Stalin, having become General Secretary, has concentrated 
boundless power in his hands,' he noted, 'and I am not convinced that 
he will always manage to use this power with sufficient care.' Not a 
word of praise was uttered about him. Trotski by contrast was 
described as 'the ablest person' in the Central Committee; but Lenin 
added that he had an excess of self-confidence and was attracted by 
'the purely administrative side of affairs'. Lenin tendentiously 
recorded, too, that Trotski's behaviour in the trade union controversy 
of 1920-1921 showed an intolerable inclination towards a defiance of 
the Central Committee (as if Lenin had never committed the same 
supposed misdemeanour). 184 
The comments on Zinoviev and Kamenev were similarly negative 
and thinly-explicated. 'I shall merely recall,' Lenin stated , 'that the 
episode of Zinoviev and Kamenev in October was, of course, no 
coincidence.' But he asked that their past should no more be held 
against them personally than Trotski's pre-revolutionary non-Bolshe-
vism. And yet the implication remained that neither Zinoviev nor 
Kamenev were fit holders of supreme political office. On Bukharin, 
Lenin's comments were equally astringent. 'Bukharin,' he declared, 'is 
not only the party's most valuable and greatest theoretician but also he 
is rightly considered the entire party's favourite; but his theoretical 
views can only with considerable doubts be categorised as fully Marxist 
since there is something scholastic in him.' Lenin was merciless: 'He has 
never studied and, I think, never fully understood dialectics.' Like 
Trotski, Bukharin received a plaudit fainter than the accompanying 
 Testament to a Revolution 
285 
reproach. Pyatakov was treated even less generously. His 'outstanding 
will-power and outstanding talents' were not such as to make him 
dependable 'on a serious political question'.'85 The effect of the 
collective portraiture was devastating. Lenin had concluded that not 
one of his highly-placed colleagues was worthy to succeed him. The 
party leadership was filled, it appeared, with a combination of arch-
authoritarian and (if his remarks on Zinoviev and Kamenev are at all 
decodable) vacillatory figures. The negative features constantly 
outweighed the positive. 186 
Some of this may be attributed to the circumstances of rushed 
dictation and also, perhaps, to the sadness of an old lion trapped in his 
lair and knowing that he might not escape. Immodesty, too, was 
observable. Lenin, despite believing in the popular accessibility of 
Marx's ideas, was blithely asserting that the party's second greatest 
theorist had basically misconceived the nature of Marxism. Altogether 
the portraits were a gallery of pessimism and were intended to be 
perceived as such. 
The unstated message was that no single leader should succeed him. 
He envisaged a collective leadership, with no individual in sole charge. 
Lenin did not claim that the plan was a panacea. But the alternative, 
which was to have Trotski or Stalin alone at the helm, appeared to him 
even worse. Of the two men, he had come to prefer Trotski despite his 
reservations. This was obvious in Lenin's recent letters seeking an 
alliance with him on questions of the day where Stalin stood in his way. 
In late December, too, Lenin asked Krupskaya to confide the message 
to Trotski that his feelings towards him since Trotski had escaped from 
Siberia to London in 1902 had not changed and would not change 
'until death itselr. 187 Nevertheless no fragmentation of the existing 
leading core of the party was envisaged. Trotski was not to be the new 
Lenin. The dictated words stopped short of such a conclusion; for 
Lenin found it distasteful to draw attention to himself directly. At any 
rate, it was ironical that his last messages to the party focussed on the 
dangers of a party split. He had been the most notorious splitter in 
European socialist history before he seized governmental power. He 
had threatened to leave the Central Committee in 1918 over the Brest-
Litovsk dispute and was willing to split the party. The tacit judgement 
he was proposing, then, was boastful in the extreme: that only he knew 
when and why to threaten the party with a split. 
He had deliberately offered only the flimsiest portraits of his 
colleagues' psychology. 188 He had mentioned Trotski's excessive 'self-
confidence' (again without sign of sensing how easily the description 
 286 
Lenin: A Political Life 
fitted him too). But otherwise he had stuck to comments on outward 
behaviour. And his avoidance of the analysis of character was 
accompanied by an inclination to trace the potential for a party split 
to general factors of the environment of politics after the October 1917. 
'Our party,' he maintained, 'relies upon the support of two classes and, 
for this reason, its instability is possible and its fall is inevitable if 
agreement between the two classes should ever prove to be 
unobtainable.' 189 
This cumbersome remark was meant to indicate that Trotski and 
Stalin might eventually find themselves on opposing sides in a dispute 
about the rival claims on the party's favour on behalf of the working 
class and the peasants. 'But I hope,' Lenin added, as if chiding himself 
for his gloomy thoughts, 'that this is an all too distant future and an all 
too improbable event to talk about.' 190 In fact a conflict between 
Trotski and Stalin over the pace of industrialisation and over the 
respective interests of the workers and the peasants broke out quickly 
after Lenin's death. 191 Lenin got the substance right, but the timing 
wrong. Yet even this is too kind to him; for it is doubtful whether the 
main social basis of the party's power was truly constituted by the 
working class and the peasantry. The alienation of most workers from 
the party was already a commonplace of Bolshevik thought, and nearly 
all peasants were either too exhausted or too ignorant to take the 
Soviet regime seriously. Lenin's bipartite summary of the party's 
dependence on the two classes, furthermore, omitted to mention its 
reliance on the sprawling administrative stratum in order to maintain 
its own 'stability'. Be that as it may, what is striking about Lenin's 
judgement is his correct perception that a party split could occur even if 
a policy dispute about the working class and the peasantry did not 
divide Trotski and Stalin. Lenin foresaw that a schism was possible 
simply over issues of personal jealousy and ambition. 192 
COVERT OPERATIONS 
What Lenin did in his character sketches was odd; but, in strict terms, 
he had not infringed the prohibition upon his political activity imposed 
by the Central Committee plenum on 18 December. But his other 
activities continued to flout the wishes of the Central Committee. 
Shortly before the plenum, he had asked E. M. Yaroslavski to take 
notes on the contributions made to the foreign-policy debate by 
Bukharin and Pyatakov 193 - and he had made this secret request 
 Testament to a Revolution 
287 
despite his alliance with Trotski; for Yaroslavski was known to dislike 
Trotski. Evidently Lenin aimed to have an independent source of 
information: yet another sign that he took nothing and no one, not 
even his new ally Trotski, for granted. The plenum resolved to remove 
Lenin from all connection with active politics for the duration of his 
illness, and devolved upon Stalin an 'individual responsibility for 
Vladimir Ilich's isolation as regards both personal relations with 
officials [of the party: R. S.] and correspondence' .194 
Thus the man designated in the sketches as one of the two leaders 
most likely to divide his beloved party regulated his contacts with the 
world. Lenin reeked nought of this. On 21 December he asked his wife 
Nadezhda to take down a short letter by dictation to Trotski, 
requesting him to represent their viewpoint on foreign trade to the 
Congress of Soviets. 195 For this he had surreptitiously acquired the 
permission of Dr Forster without consulting Stalin. 196 Yet Trotski 
wished to be seen to be a loyal member of the leadership and told 
Kamenev of the letter's receipt. 197 Stalin urged Kamenev to express 
gratitude that Trotski refused to contravene the Central Committee's 
instructions about Lenin's convalescence. 198 But Stalin was mightily 
displeased in himself and, on 22 December, picked up the phone to 
Krupskaya. He was known for his insensitive turn of phrase. His wife, 
Nadezhda Allilueva, had recently been working as one of Lenin's 
shorthand typists and had asked her colleagues round to the house to 
see her new-born daughter. The door was left open as Stalin walked in, 
and Allilueva reminded him that the baby might catch a cold. Stalin 
retorted that she would die all the sooner. 199 Even so, Krupskaya had 
never been the butt of his foul tongue; and she was offended by the 
obscenities he uttered on learning about the infringement of the Central 
Committee's interdiction on communication between Lenin and other 
leaders without Stalin's sanction. Krupskaya, usually the epitome of 
what in Britain would be called Victorian self-control, fell to the floor 
sobbing in shame and anger.200 
Next day, she recounted her humiliation to Kamenev, exclaiming: 
'In all the past 30 years I have not heard a single obscene word from a 
single comrade; the interests of the party and of Ilich are no less dear to 
me than to Stalin. '201 Krupskaya kept the incident secret from Lenin, 
however, on the grounds that he might be upset. Everything was geared 
to getting him better. And, in purely formal terms, she presumably 
could see that her action had indeed infringed a Central Committee 
decision putting Stalin in charge of Lenin's isolation and convales-
cence. 
 288 
Lenin: A Political Life 
That Stalin could have lost his own self-control to the extent of bad-
mouthing his leader's wife and comrade is remarkable. It may be that, 
as was rumoured about him not long afterwards, he had already 
concluded that Lenin's life was fast drawing to its close and that he had 
nothing to lose. Perhaps he judged that 'Lenin is kaput' .2°2 This would 
tally with a recollection made four decades later by Lidiya Fotieva, 
who served as Lenin's chief secretary. She claimed that the aggravation 
of his medical condition induced him to approach Stalin yet again for a 
phial of poison.2°3 Stalin could have had no more vivid sign that 
Lenin's energies were fading. But he also knew about Lenin's resilience. 
The struggle over foreign-trade policy continued to exercise the minds 
of the Bolshevik leaders. Lenin was still a dangerous and important 
piece on the chess-board. It could well be that Stalin's growing 
confidence was matched by a sharpening sense of exasperation, and 
that the pressures upon him became ungovernable, just for a moment, 
on 22 December. The message dictated by Lenin to Krupskaya, which 
was the goad for Stalin's outburst, had been a request to Trotski to act 
as his ally in the Politburo conflict.204 Such a coalition, even with Lenin 
on his sickbed and operating at a small fraction of his normal capacity, 
was a threat to Stalin's continuing advance on power. 
Stalin was put directly on guard on 23 December by a conversation 
with Mariya Volodicheva. This was Lidiya Fotieva's junior partner as 
Lenin's secretary, and it was she who took down the first section of his 
'Letter to the Congress'. This did not mention Stalin by name; but it 
counselled structural change in the central party organs as well as 
recommending that Trotski's ideas on economic planning should be 
welcomed by the party.205 Lenin evidently was intent on some political 
reform, and no one had more to lose from this than Stalin. 
Volodicheva did not merely discuss Lenin's words with Stalin: she 
handed him the text.206 
Volodicheva obviously appreciated the importance of what had been 
dictated; her immediate reaction had been to ring up Fotieva and ask 
what to do with the dictated piece.207 Fotieva, who was an admirer of 
Stalin, advised her to show it to him. Going round to his flat, she came 
upon Stalin in conclave with Ordzhonikidze, Bukharin and A.M. 
Nazaretyan (who worked in the Central Committee Secretariat). Stalin 
snatched the letter, instructed his wife to look after Volodicheva and 
adjourned with the men- o tempora, o mores- to discuss the contents. 
After a few minutes they re-emerged and Stalin, whose hands hung 
heavy by his side, told her directly: 'Burn it!'208 She obeyed. But when 
she saw Fotieva and their colleague Mariya Glyasser next day, these 
 Testament to a Revolution 
289 
two expressed horror at her action in destroying Lenin's letter. In fact 
Volodicheva had left four copies of it in the safe in Lenin's Kremlin 
office. The three women agreed that the best step would be for 
Volodicheva to type out a fifth copy to replace the one reduced to 
ashes. This was done. 209 According to Volodicheva, she did not know 
that Lenin had meant the contents to be guarded from the view of 
others. She purported to be astonished when told this by him next day; 
and she deceived him into believing that his wishes had not been 
infringed.210 But she lied then and she lied in her memoir. She had 
consulted Fotieva in the first instance only because it was obvious to 
her that Lenin was concocting a plot. She revealed it to Stalin precisely 
on the grounds that a secret anti-Stalin ploy was in hand. 
Lenin went on with his dictation; his intransigence was such that 
Stalin, who was formally in charge of his medical supervision, 
consulted with Bukharin and Kamenev. The result, on 24 December, 
was the granting of permission to have a short-hand typist with him for 
between five and ten minutes daily. This was tied to a general 
prohibition on any politician, relative or domestic servant passing 
information to him about current politics.211 Stalin hoped to cut off his 
potential for interference at its tap-root. 
Volodicheva was summoned again by Lenin the same evening. The 
Soviet leader, hated by his enemies at home and abroad as the Red 
dictator, did not take easily to dictation of the literary kind. He liked to 
see his manuscript, to pace up and down his office, to insert and excise 
until the last possible moment; and, when once induced to use the 
services of a short-hand typist in mid-1918, he had given it up as a bad 
job.212 But there was no other option in 1922. Volodicheva tactfully 
put it to him: 'I know that I'm your necessary evil, but only for a short 
period.'213 Lenin felt reassured that his words would remain 
confidential. She had the courage to confess that she had had to take 
a red pencil to some of his stylistic errors.214 But this reversal of roles, 
reminding him of school-days, bound them closely together. He for his 
part taught her the conventions of copy-editing.215 It was Volodicheva 
who took down the six thumbnail sketches of Bolshevik leaders. But 
her colleagues, Lidiya Fotieva and Mariya Glyasser, also took turns in 
the busy last week of December 1922 when the Congress of Soviets was 
in session. All three were friends, and Lenin must surely have trusted 
them implicitly. He enjoined that no one was to have access to the 
materials except himself or, in the event of his death, Krupskaya. The 
intention was that, in due time, he would retrieve it from the safe and 
pass it on to the Party Congress.216 
 290 
Lenin: A Political Life 
But it is a moot point whether they stayed loyal to his command. 
They had already run to Stalin, already lied to Lenin, already shown 
they knew what was at stake. In their later lives they were wiJiing 
political handmaidens unto Stalin; and there is definite evidence that at 
least Glyasser took an anti-Trotski position in the controversies of 
1923.217 Indeed Fotieva, not long before she died, admitted to having 
handed over further items dictated by Lenin before his death.218 
Nothing can yet be proved, but it would not be totally surprising if 
these young women, squeezed in a vice of contrary loyalties and 
sensing that Lenin would not last much longer, continued to yield 
information to Stalin. Not only the first item in Lenin's so-called 
'testament' but quite possibly the entire series of items may have been 
in his hands as quickly as they could be deciphered from the short-hand 
notes of Lenin's trusted amanuenses. 
