 5 The Tar in the Honey 
THE POLISH-SOVIET WAR 
Civil wars are notoriously messy wars. The military campaigns between 
the North and the Confederacy in the USA in 1861-1865 had a brutal 
neatness; but they were exceptional. When a state collapses into 
internal war, cross-cutting tensions and enmities are typically released. 
The civil war in England, Scotland, Wales and Ireland in the mid-
seventeenth century is an example. National, regional and confessional 
as well as social and economic divisions became sharper and cut deep 
tranches of lasting embitterment into the attitudes and practices of the 
combatant armies. 
The 'Russian' Civil War was similarly complex, equally bitter. The 
year 1917 witnessed not one uniform revolutionary process but a 
multitude of variegated revolutions, and the ensuing years saw the 
outbreak of many intersecting civil wars. In 1918 the Bolshevik-led 
Reds had fought against the armies assembled by the Socialist-
Revolutionaries in the Volga. By the end of the year this conflict had 
been superseded by a struggle between the Reds and the anti-socialist 
forces of the Whites. Russians fought with Russians. The peasantry's 
hostility to taxation and conscription induced thousands of peasants to 
go into the nearby woods and fight off all outsiders. These 'Greens' 
hated Reds and Whites indiscriminately. Nor were the various 
campaigns exclusively a Russian affair. The first great campaign after 
the October Revolution was the invasion of the Ukraine by Bolshevik-
led troops in December 1917. It was re-invaded by the Reds in 1918 
after the German defeat by the Allies. There was also much fighting 
between the various non-Russian peoples. Border disputes raged 
among the Armenians, Azeris and Georgians; and the violence 
involved adjacent states. The Turkish government sent its forces into 
territory claimed by Georgia. Military intervention in the former 
Russian Empire was not confined to major powers such as Germany, 
France, the United Kingdom and the USA. All sides were enmeshed in 
large civil wars within the Civil War. 
Poland was another complication. In December 1919 the Supreme 
Allied Council called for a frontier to be drawn between Russia and 
117 
 118 
Lenin: A Political Life 
Poland (which was to be named the Curzon Line after the British 
Foreign Secretary). Yet the Polish prime minister, Ignacy Paderewski, 
claimed that the borders of the first independent Polish state since 1795 
required historical and demographic debate. The Bolshevik commit-
ment to European revolution, too, exacerbated the situation. No Polish 
or Soviet leader seriously expected that conflict of some kind could 
permanently be avoided. In 1919 the Polish forces had helped to 
demolish the 'Lit-Bel' Soviet Republic and entered Vilnius as 
conquerors. In addition, conflicts had occurred between Polish and 
non-Bolshevik Ukrainian forces. Negotiations in the autumn between 
Sovnarkom and Paderewski were aborted by mutual mistrust; and the 
Polish military commander Josef Pilsudski held talks with the ousted 
Ukrainian nationalist leader Semion Petlyura for a war to be fought to 
establish a border federation of Poland and Ukraine in opposition to 
the Soviet republic of Lenin and Trotski. 1 
After a winter's preparation, Pilsudski struck in spring 1920. The 
campaign was brief. Kiev was under Polish occupation on 7 May.2 
Such seizures of power had happened so often in the Ukraine in the 
previous years that Lenin was not unduly disconcerted. Bolsheviks 
were enjoined by him to treat 'the new adventure with utmost 
tranquillity'. His explanation ofPilsudski's motives was curious. Lenin 
maintained that the Poles were primarily seeking to lengthen the line of 
contact between Moscow and Berlin and thereby inhibit a German 
socialist revolution. It did not occur to him that Polish developments 
were predominantly autochthonous.3 But Lenin's judgement, eccentric 
as it was, revealed what was in his own mind. Despite having insisted 
on the signing of the Brest-Litovsk treaty in 1918, he had never 
forsworn the export of Soviet revolution on the point of Red bayonets 
should a suitable opportunity offer itself.4 Other Bolsheviks who had 
advocated the same treaty were not immune from a subsequent 
compulsion to prove their revolutionary credentials by advocating 
risky ultra-leftist putsches. Zinoviev, who had an additional stain on 
his record for having opposed the October Revolution, was to behave 
in this fashion when calling for a German communist seizure of power 
in 1923. But Lenin had no need to demonstrate the genuineness of his 
radicalism. He acted in mid-1920 as he would have done with or 
without Brest-Litovsk. For him, the treaty of 1918 had always been a 
manoeuvre that was a temporary necessity. Pilsudski's incursion gave 
him the chance he had awaited. 
Throughout May 1920 the Politburo was gathering military and 
political personnel to form a Western front against the Poles. Trotski 
 The Tar in the Honey 
119 
was given oversight of the forthcoming campaign, and Stalin was 
attached to its southern sector with Budenny's cavalry units which had 
been recalled from other war zones.5 The Red Army moved swiftly. 
Fierce but brief battles took place in the approach to Kiev, resulting in 
defeat for the Poles. By 10 June, Pilsudski had been forced to evacuate 
the Ukrainian capital. His forces were pursued and harassed by the 
Reds. Negotiations with the Lithuanian government produced an 
agreement for a joint Red and Lithuanian attack on Vilnius, which fell 
on 14 July. The Reds pressed on and took Grodno, and by this success 
they approached the moment of decision; for immediately ahead of 
them lay the notional Curzon line. Any further movement would have 
indicated a will to invade territory recently declared to belong to 
Poland by the Allied Supreme Council. The Bolsheviks would be 
disclosing a desire to use their armies to envelop Europe in political 
disturbances and insurrections. 6 
The British Foreign Office sent a telegram to Moscow on II July 
calling for the Curzon line to be respected. 7 The Bolshevik Central 
Committee assembled for a plenum on 17 July. Participation was high: 
seventeen full and candidate members attended, and Stalin was the sole 
figure from the Politburo who was absent. The Polish-Soviet war was 
far from dominating the agenda. Deliberations on both the Second 
Congress of the Communist International and several wrangles over 
personnel preceded the item on the telegram from Lord Curzon. The 
decision was to reject the British request. Chicherin was told to reply to 
Curzon in kind and Trotski to draw up a suitably rousing public 
proclamation; and the Secretariat was instructed to mobilise all Poles 
in the party for deployment on the Western front. 8 The Commander-
in-Chief of the Western front, Mikhail Tukhachevski, received the 
political sanction he had wanted. On 23 July he issued the order that 
the Red Army should cross the river Bug and occupy Warsaw.9 On the 
same day the Polish Bureau of the Central Committee appointed a 
Provisional Polish Revolutionary Committee. It was to be chaired by 
Julian Marchlewski; his colleagues were to be Feliks Dzierzynski, 
Feliks Kon, Edward Prochniak and Josef Unszlicht. This act showed 
that the Bolsheviks aimed at more than hot pursuit in order to teach 
Pilsudski a lesson. The Provisional Polish Revolutionary Committee, 
or Polrevkom, proclaimed the removal of the country's existing cabinet 
and issued decrees on land, industry, administration and security in line 
with Bolshevik policies in Russia since 1917. The inclusion of Cheka 
leaders Dzierzynski and Unszlicht showed that no mercy would be 
shown. The Polrevkom shifted its headquarters westwards as the Red 
 120 
Lenin: A Political Life 
Army advanced. Dzierzynski awaited his triumphant return to 
Warsaw. 10 
Inside the core of the Bolshevik central leadership there was a sharp 
reversal of the roles played in the Brest-Litovsk dispute. Trotski, 
especially after his inspection tour of the troops, urged caution; Radek 
was even more dubious as to the reception the Reds would receive from 
Polish workers and peasants. 11 Both had opposed a separate peace 
with Germany in 1918. Lenin, who had insisted on avoiding war at that 
time, had become its most committed advocate. By coincidence Stalin, 
too, had moved to a pro-war position alongside Lenin; but even he had 
worries about the invasion. His particular concern was lest the Reds at 
both front and rear were inadequately organised, inspirited and co-
ordinated. Lenin was the sole fire-breathing enthusiast.12 
Thus it would not be too far-fetched to argue that, if the attack on 
Kiev had been more a war of Pilsudski than of the Polish government, 
the advance on Warsaw came predominantly from Vladimir Lenin. 
This was not the first time that, in contrast with his own party's left 
wing, he overestimated the willingness of foreign workers to disregard 
the patriotic summonses of their governments. This intra-party 
phenomenon was observable throughout the Great War. His 
perception of the significance of nationalism was acute in relation 
mainly to the territory of the old Russian empire (whereas the 
Bolshevik left tended to have fuzzy vision here). 13 In any case he was 
not wholly devoid of corroborating data. Reports of restlessness 
among the workers of both Warsaw and Berlin were not absent in 
summer 1920. Lenin was not entirely stupid in supposing that the 
political situation was more fluid than his more cautious colleagues, 
despite their closer contact with the Red Army, intimated; and, because 
he was in Moscow and they were at or near the front, he was well-
placed to push his policy on them. They, moreover, shared the 
assumption that the October Revolution in Russia would expire unless 
fraternal revolutionary states were established elsewhere in Europe; 
they had also become loath to challenge Lenin's general judgement: by 
1920 it was accepted in the Central Committee that he had been right 
about the October Revolution and the treaty ofBrest-Litovsk. The idea 
that his intuition might be fallible was becoming heretical. 
His main difficulty was with the men in the Polrevkom who had a 
more leftist attitude to politics than he. So far from wanting to hand 
the land over to the Polish peasantry as had been done in Russia, 
Marchlewski aimed to nationalise it and set up collective farms. Lenin 
was furious. A chance might be lost to keep the sympathy of the 
 The Tar in the Honey 
121 
peasants as the Red Army advanced. 14 Nor, on the other hand, was 
this proponent of state terror entirely convinced that the Polrevkom 
would take the brutal measures against the gentry, the clergy and the 
old regime in Poland that he thought vital. All through the summer he 
urged an expansion of terrorism. 15 On 19 August he sent a message to 
Radek which showed how his worries about the land and the terror 
coalesced: 'I beg you, go direct to Dzierzynski and insist that the gentry 
and the kulaks are destroyed ruthlesslessly and rather more quickly 
and energetically, also that the peasants are effectively helped to take 
over estate land and forest.' 16 For not even Lenin, despite his unbridled 
optimism, thought that the Red Army with its northern sector under 
Tukhachevski could occupy Poland and unaided set up a socialist 
administration. The aim was to help the Polish workers to help 
themselves, and then to move on to Germany. In late July 1920 it 
looked to Lenin and to many governments in the West that he might 
well succeed. 
'THE INFANTILE DISEASE OF"LEFTISM" IN COMMUNISM' 
In April and May 1920, in advance of the Second Congress of the 
Communist International, Lenin composed a pamphlet of thirty 
thousand words. He wrote it out as usual in longhand; the experience 
of trying to dictate his thoughts to a duty secretary, which had briefly 
been forced on him after the attempt on his life in mid-1918, had been 
uncongenial. Despite his many other commitments, he made time to do 
things in the way he liked. 17 
The pamphlet began with a declaration: 'At the present historical 
moment, the situation is precisely that the Russian model displays 
something - and something extremely essential - to all countries about 
their inevitable and not distant future.' 18 The October Revolution 
showed, he argued, that socialism required 'the most merciless war' to 
be waged by the proletariat against the bourgeoisie. This in turn 
necessitated 'the unconditional centralisation and strictest discipline' of 
the proletariat; and the proletariat's leadership, the party, had also to 
adhere to 'the strictest centralisation and iron discipline' .19 The 
Bolsheviks in Lenin's opinion had been placed in an excellent position 
to learn the necessary lessons early. The harshness of the Romanov 
monarchy had forced Russian socialist theorists into becoming emigres 
and thus brought them into contact with the rest of the world's latest 
ideas, and the years before 1917 saw the Bolsheviks test these out 
 122 
Lenin: A Political Life 
intensively in a variety of activities: illegal and legal work; small party 
groups and mass organisation; parliamentarianism and terrorism.2° 
Lenin's argument was that the Bolshevik tradition had not been leftism 
for its own sake. Mistakes had been made. Lenin recalled the boycott 
of the First State Duma in 1906 and the initial refusal to sign a peace 
treaty with the Germans in 1918.21 (This was also a piece of self-
promotion: Lenin had wanted both to enter the Duma and sign the 
peace.) The point was that Bolshevism had had to cure itself 
periodically of an affliction he called 'the infantile disease of leftism'. 22 
According to Lenin, compromise between revolutionary elan and 
practical prudence had been at the heart of official party policies under 
his leadership. There was some truth in this; but it neglected Lenin's 
periods of recklessness and intransigence. His summons for insurrec-
tion at all costs and without delay in autumn 1917 was a classic 
instance. This is exactly what was best known about him among the 
Communist International delegates already assembling for the 
Congress in Moscow. Lenin wanted to describe the less rumbustious 
episodes of the past. His detour into the history of his party drove 
home the message to left-wing elements in the Communist Inter-
national's parties that the Russian Communist Party, the only 
affiliated party which had seized and kept power, had achieved its 
ends by avoiding ultra-leftist sloganeering.23 
Among his targets were the communists of Germany. The recently-
formed German Communist Party had already lost its left-wingers, 
who had established the German Workers' Communist Party. Within 
the German Communist Party itself there remained a left-wing faction 
highly critical of the official leadership. The malcontents argued that 
insufficient effort had been given to involving the working class in the 
running of the party. As a result, they said, a 'party of leaders' had 
emerged rather than a 'mass party'. The German left-wing communists 
aimed at a dictatorship of the proletariat wherein the proletariat held 
direct power.24 Many also questioned whether party activists should 
bother with work in trade unions. They placed a premium on political 
propaganda and organisation undertaken exclusively in the party.25 
Lenin was scathingly realistic: 'We can (and must) begin to construct 
socialism not from human material which exists in fairy-tales and is 
specially created by us but from the legacy bequeathed to us by 
capitalism.'26 Then he dealt with the contention of the German leftist 
faction that parliaments were 'an historically and politically redundant' 
arena of revolutionary struggle.27 Lenin repeated his pre-1914 
argument that, while parliamentarianism would not produce a 
 The Tar in the Honey 
123 
transition to socialism, no party should pass up the opportunities 
afforded by Dumas and Reichstags for propaganda. 28 Compromises 
were a necessity for mature revolutionaries in quest of power. 
Permanent flexibility was required. Lenin maintained that it was 
Kautsky, Bauer and other opponents of communist parties who held to 
fixed and unalterable strategical schemata. Here was a typical 
polemical flourish. The ultra-leftism inside and outside the German 
Communist Party was identified by him with the Kautskyism which 
was considered a heresy throughout the Communist Jnternational.29 
The German Communist Party as a whole- and not just its leftists-
was called upon by Lenin to be more flexible. The German 
Independent Social-Democratic Party, which included Kautsky in its 
leadership, was riven by factionalism, and its left-wing sections had 
approached the German Communist Party for co-operation. The 
German Communist Party, in Lenin's opinion, had wrongly rejected 
these overtures. He claimed that, between the February and October 
Revolutions, his policy had been to manoeuvre and compromise in 
relations with the Mensheviks so as to detach their 'best workers' from 
them.30 This was an astonishing claim for the protagonist of total 
irreconcilability.31 But Lenin's distortion of the history of 1917, with 
which the non-Russian parties of the Communist International were ill-
acquainted, served current political ends. A Soviet Germany was his 
primary foreign objective. But realism was essential. Lenin insisted 
that, as the Bolsheviks had had to accept the treaty of Brest-Litovsk, so 
the German comrades might even have to acquiesce in the treaty of 
Versailles for a lengthy period.32 
This was argumentation a l'outrance: no aspect of international 
relations was more fiercely criticised by communists, Russian or 
German, than the Versailles treaty. The test of the German Communist 
Party's seriousness about obtaining power was its capacity to accept 
the necessity of harsh compromises. The same was true of the nascent 
communist movement in the United Kingdom. The British party had 
yet to be formed, but already left-wing socialists such as Sylvia 
Pankhurst and Willie Gallacher had turned their backs on parliamen-
tarianism. Lenin did not wish to discourage sympathisers. He conceded 
that their revolutionary mood was 'cheering and valuable'. But moods, 
he added, are inadequate for the preparation of an advance on 
power. 33 He proposed that Gallacher and his friends should enter 
parliamentary politics and even effect an accommodation with the 
British Labour Party. His reasoning was that the British Labour Party 
held the affections of most working-class people in the United 
 124 
Lenin: A Political Life 
Kingdom whereas the British communist movement had scant support. 
An electoral pact would enable the communists to gain a few 
parliamentary seats. Lenin asserted that similar deals had been done 
between Bolsheviks and Mensheviks before 1917.34 This was yet 
another overdrawn analogy. A Bolshevik-Menshevik coalition had 
been formed in 1906 because most Bolsheviks and Mensheviks desired 
it; they did not come together because a newly-formed Bolshevik 
faction wanted to become more influential by means of association 
with a more popular Menshevik faction. Js Lenin added that 'the 
conditions for a successful proletarian revolution were clearly growing' 
in Britain. If this were so, he did not explain why his intransigence 
towards the Mensheviks in 191 7 was inappropriate in the case of 
Pankhurst and Gallacher.36 
Lenin admitted that the British Labour Party might reject any 
overtures from British communists, but he asserted that even a 
rejection would raise the prestige of communism among the working 
class.37 This dubious prediction ignored the difficulties that a 
Communist Party of Great Britain would experience in recruiting 
members if it forswore a role as rebel against the political status quo. 
He also vastly underestimated the hostility to his own world-view 
which had taken root among Labour Party leaders. They were bound 
to show the door to communists seeking a pact with them. 
Nevertheless The Infantile Disease of 'Leftism' was a milestone in the 
development of international communism. It showed how confident 
Lenin had become. His style was hectoring and condescending. Many 
communist leaders in Europe were not political novices; and yet Lenin 
lectured them as from a professorial chair. He patronisingly referred to 
their politics as being childlike. He was claiming, not too subtly, the 
wisdom of the patriarch; and, whenever he indicated past mistakes 
made by the Bolshevik party, he adduced the rashness of his own 
Bolshevik opponents. Apparently he had never been in the wrong. He 
also played on the assumption that no one would have the knowledge 
or presumption to challenge his tendentious exposition of Bolshevik 
party history. Plainly he wished to subject all Communist International 
parties to firm discipline. Thus British communists should not be 
allowed to abstain from parliamentary elections.38 His ambition to 
supervise the other parties endured after the book went to press in 
Petrograd. News came through that the German Communist Party had 
split into two factions and that the communist sympathiser in the 
Italian Socialist Party, Amadeo Bordiga, had come out against putting 
up parliamentary candidates. In a hastily-written appendix, Lenin 
 The Tar in the Honey 
125 
excoriated these tendencies as being precisely what he had warned 
against in the book's earlier pages. Ultra-leftism, wrote the 
quintessential ultra-leftist of 1917, had to be disowned bl the Second 
Congress of the Communist International in Petrograd.3 
THE SECOND CONGRESS OF THE COMMUNIST 
INTERNATIONAL 
Delegates to the Second Communist International Congress congre-
gated in Moscow in summer 1920 and, in deference to Petrograd's 
status as the birthplace of the October Revolution, they took the train 
to the north and assembled in the Smolny Institute on 19 July 1920. 
Grigori Zinoviev spoke for the International's Executive Committee. A 
funeral march was played in memory of comrades who had died in the 
struggles for revolution in central Europe.40 His report exhibited 
delight that the Independent German Social-Democratic Party, the 
French Socialist Party and the American Socialist Party had broken 
with the Second International. Zinoviev enjoyed the refracted light of 
the October seizure of power (which he had opposed at the time). In 
particular, he called upon member parties to accept the organisational 
rules proposed by the Bolshevik party.41 
A prolonged ovation greeted Lenin as he rose to deliver the report on 
the world political situation. His words caused a certain surprise. In his 
view, the Great War had added to the Jist of the world's colonies. 
Germany, Austria-Hungary and Bulgaria had been reduced 'to what is 
the equivalent of colonial status' by the treaty of Versailles; and Russia, 
too, had suffered in like fashion. 42 Of the major pre-war powers, only 
USA and Britain were economically independent any longer. France, 
despite being co-victor in the war, was a debtor nation. Even Britain's 
foreign indebtment had mounted; and the collapse of the '"mechan-
ism" of the world capitalist economy' meant that the USA also could 
'not buy or sell'. Supposedly, the fall in American working-class living 
standards made the growth of a 'revolutionary mood' inevitable.43 
Lenin erroneously asserted that the British Independent Labour Party 
was seeking affiliation to the Communist International.44 In addition, 
Lenin expatiated on German developments. Otto Bauer's pamphlet 
Bolshevism or Social-Democracy was criticised as being a central 
European variant of Menshevism. It was no such thing. For Bauer 
contended that Bolshevism, while being suited to the peculiar 
 126 
Lenin: A Political Life 
conditions of Russia, ill-befitted the rest of industrial Europe. The fact 
that Lenin overlooked this was an index of his determination to avoid 
Bauer's arguments in hope of attracting support from Germans and 
Austrians who might otherwise ignore him.45 
The 'opportunism' of foreign parties supporting the Second 
International, he maintained, was explicable by the benefits accruing 
to the 'labour aristocracy' from imperialism.46 This was a greater 
obstacle to communism's advance than left-wing 'infantilism'. The 
Communist International would be able to bring the sincere but misted 
leftists of central and eastern Germany to their senses.47 Giacinto 
Serrati from the Italian Socialist Party congratulated the Red Army on 
a campaign that was going welt against the Potes.48 Kart Reinhardt, 
speaking for the Austrian Communist party, expressed revulsion about 
the barbarous repression of Beta Kun's Soviet republic in Hungary.49 
But it was Julian Marchlewski from the Communist Workers' Party of 
Poland that made the Congress look closely at the current military 
campaign in Poland. While suggesting that a Polish Soviet republic 
would eventually emerge, he did not exclude the possibility that 
German volunteers would intervene against the Reds: 'We still face an 
uphill struggle. '50 
Marchlewski's speech, however, was brief and rather abstract. 
Delegates were waiting on events. A map was pinned to a wall to 
display the Reds' daily progress.51 The second session was delayed for 
four days white Lenin and his Russian colleagues concentrated on the 
Polish war. On 23 July, Zinoviev offered the report on the rote and 
structure of the communist party, urging that the current techniques of 
Bolshevism be adopted everywhere. He advocated centralism, 
discipline, hierarchy and careful vetting of recruits to each communist 
party; and, unlike Lenin, acknowledged that the 'dictatorship of the 
proletariat' in practice involved 'the dictatorship of the communist 
party'.52 Debate at last became heated. Jack Tanner, a leader of the 
shop stewards' movement in Britain, objected to the dictatorship of a 
minority.53 Such worries induced Lenin to intervene with the point that 
only the minority of any class joins a party and that, in the case of the 
communist parties, this minority is the class's political vanguard. The 
proletariat had to be led, and Lenin noted that Tanner had not denied 
this. Moreover, he insisted that the Congress should formulate a policy 
mandatory for all member parties of the Communist International. 54 
The Bolshevik leaders manipulated the proceedings with cunning. 
Trotski spoke next, announcing that the Polish government that very 
 The Tar in the Honey 
127 
day had sued for peace. The Congress was exhilarated, and delegates 
were inhibited from protesting against Zinoviev's theses. 55 Nor did it 
harm Lenin's interests at the Congress that the entire third session, 
which followed on 24 July, was given up to disputes among the foreign 
parties. 56 
Back he came at session four with a report he would not trust to any 
colleague: on the national and colonial questions. He had not forgotten 
his problems with the Bolshevik party at the Eighth Party Congress in 
March 1919.57 Yet he did not quite get a clear path from the 
Communist International delegates. The colonies of the European 
powers had predominantly non-industrial and pre-capitalist econo-
mies, and Lenin had usually called on his party to support 'bourgeois-
democratic liberation movements' in them. The Indian delegate M. N. 
Roy thought this indulgent to the indigenous bourgeoisies of the 
colonies. The tendency was for them to accommodate themselves to 
their imperial masters. Roy, unlike Bukharin in 1915-1917, spoke from 
direct experience; and Lenin gave way to him. His modified submission 
to the Communist International Congress demanded that support be 
given to the 'revolutionary movement' in colonies and not to the 
'bourgeois-democratic liberation movement'. 58 
Lenin at this juncture made a major addition to his own Marxist 
strategy; the fact that Lenin did this en passant at a Communist 
International Congress has left the importance of his words little 
noticed. But a crucial lacuna in his thought was being filled. As yet he 
had never explained how socialism would be introduced to countries 
which were not already capitalist. At the Congress he stated for the first 
time explicitly that 'the Communist International should advance and 
theoretically establish the proposition that, with the assistance of the 
proletariat of the advanced countries, the rest of the countries can 
move over to the soviet system and - through certain stages of 
development - towards communism while by-passing the capitalist 
stage of development.'59 How this would occur he even now did not 
venture to say. 'Practical experience,' he opined reassuringly, would 
give the answers.60 At all costs he wanted to avoid an opening of past 
polemics among Russian socialists. Back in the 1890s he, like his fellow 
Marxists in Russia, had urged that Russia had to go through more or 
less the same course of economic and social development as Britain, 
France and Germany. Capitalism, Lenin maintained, could not be 
leapt o'er. It had to be undergone and survived. Only subsequently 
could there be socialism.61 In mid-1920, faced with Communist 
 128 
Lenin: A Political Life 
International comrades from entirely non-industrialised countries, he 
had had to re-think his strategy. The result was an unadvertised attack 
on his own pre-revolutionary assumptions. 
This intellectual shift was made without reference to Russia. In 1917 
he had still been contending that capitalism already existed to a very 
large extent in the former Russian empire. After the October 
Revolution he admitted that vast sectors of the economy had been 
untouched by capitalism. In central Asia and northern Siberia there 
were social groups which had not known even feudalism.62 But it was 
not until 1922 that he came to apply this revision of his Marxist 
understanding to his own country.63 
Nor did Lenin yet try to link his newly-developed thinking to his 
practice in 1917. The strategy of the Bolshevik leader in the October 
Revolution was replete with inchoateness and contradictions; but, at 
least in some respects, it was premised on the capacity of a Russia 
which was not fully industrialised to move directly, even if gradually, 
towards a socialist order.64 This, too, was a linkage made by Lenin 
only in 1922. Consequently, at the Congress, he also studiously ignored 
Karl Marx's speculative musings in the 1880s. In particular, Marx had 
written letters of encouragement to the Russian agrarian socialists (or 
narodnikl). Marx had insisted that there was no uniform 'Marxist' 
theory of stages; and that, if socialists were to obtain and hold power in 
contemporary non-capitalist Russia, they might even be able to 
inaugurate a socialist society based on the peasant land communes. 
His proviso was that such a revolution would require support from 
proletarian revolutions in the economically-advanced countries of the 
West.65 Not a breath about this left Lenin's lips. To his dying day he 
refused to advert attention to the mutual admiration of Marx and the 
narodniki. For Lenin, it was de rigueur to present himself as the most 
orthodox Marxist; and he was untroubled by the fact that this 
necessitated playing fast and loose with the contents of Marx's 
correspondence with Russian nineteenth-century agrarian Marxists.66 
Debate continued into the fifth session on 28 July with reports by 
delegates from Asia. The 'national question' in the states of Europe 
with large national minorities interested the Congress less than the 
'colonial question' in the rest of the world.67 A consensus had arisen 
that the new communist parties in the colonies should preserve their 
independence from other anti-imperial political groups. Evidently, if 
the Communist International wanted such parties, it had to give them a 
rationale beyond helping the indigenous bourgeoisies to power. The 
ideological liaison between Lenin and Roy was disrupted momentarily 
 The Tar in the Honey 
129 
by Serrati's awkward comment that words such as 'backward' were 
undefined and amenable to chauvinistic and pseudo-revolutionary 
interpretation.68 Serrati had made an accurate observation, altogether 
too accurate for the liking of Zinoviev who called it 'very uncom-
radely'.69 Zinoviev's snub did the trick: Congress voted unanimously 
for the proposed theses with just three abstentions.70 
Next day, at session six, Zinoviev reported on the conditions of 
admission to the Communist International. Radek followed him with 
an attack on the Independent German Social-Democratic Party.71 
Foreign parties at the Congress were subjected to pressure by 
Bolsheviks in sessions seven and eight; but the German Independents 
Crispien and Dittmann were singled out for such treatment by others 
too.72 Crispien stood up to it, castigating Bolshevik attitudes to 
revolutionary terror and to the peasant question.73 Belatedly, on 30 
July, Lenin joined in. He took Crispien to task for failing to accept the 
need for the dictatorship of the proletariat and for terror. He also 
complained about his delay in breaking with Kautsky: almost a capital 
offence in Lenin's eyes.74 Zinoviev's theses gained overwhelming 
endorsement.75 On 2 August it was the turn of Bukharin at session 
nine. The Bolsheviks had selected him to deliver the report on 
parliamentarianism. It was an ironic choice in the light of Bukharin's 
reputation for hostility to the use of parliaments by Europe's socialists 
in the Great War;76 and Lenin relished hearing him declare that 
communists had to use parliaments as instruments of political struggle. 
Amadeo Bordiga gave a counter-report, stating that no parliament 
could serve at all as a means of 'liberating the proletariat'.77 Without 
waiting for Bukharin to reply to Bordiga, Lenin returned to the 
platform in the following session. He objected that Bordiga was willing 
to overlook one of the few opportunities for agitation and organisation 
available to revolutionaries in advance of a revolution.78 The theses of 
Nikolai Bukharin won a thumping triumph.79 
In sessions eleven and twelve there was acceptance of Radek's report 
on trade unions.80 Not until4 August, in session thirteen and over two 
weeks into the Congress, was a report offered by a leader who did not 
come from the Bolsheviks. This came in the debate on the agrarian 
question. The rapporteur was Julian Marchlewski. Officially he 
represented the Polish delegation; but he had belonged to the Russian 
Social-Democratic Labour Party before 1914 and had lived in Moscow 
intermittently since 1918. He did not even deliver his report in person. 
Following the Red Army's advance, he had been appointed to the 
Polish provisional revolutionary government and had left for Poland. 
 130 
Lenin: A Political Life 
His report was given by Ernst Meyer, who admitted that the words 
were based on 'the theses of comrade Lenin'.81 
Lenin recounted his experience with the Bolshevik party in 1917, 
when he had initially hoped to incorporate the principle of land 
nationalisation and, after criticism, had had to remove this particular 
demand from his theses.82 The confession guaranteed success for the 
report. It was a lively debate. Italian delegate Antonio Graziadei had 
implicitly criticised Marx's prediction of a steady concentration of 
capital in agriculture, resulting in the disappearance of the peasantry, 
as having been proved wrong.83 Such heresy was attacked by the 
Bolshevik Grigori Sokolnikov. A reverential tone was stipulated when 
Marx and Engels were being cited. Unanimous acceptance of Meyer's 
report ensued.84 Delegates moved on to discuss the statutes of the 
Communist International at session fourteen that evening. Diplomatic 
considerations entrusted the report to a non-Russian: there had been 
criticisms that the Russians were ruling the Congress. The Bulgarian 
Christo Kabakchiev was asked to propose statutes which, by 
empowering the Congress to set up a highly centralised structure for 
the Communist International, would lend still greater power to the 
Bolsheviks.85 David Wijnkoop from the Netherlands was not taken in. 
He declared that the International's leadership would turn out to be 
simply an expanded Russian Executive Committee.86 Paul Levi had 
suggested Germany as the location of the Executive Committee, and 
Wijnkoop said he had no objections to Italy or Norway.87 But John 
Reed spoke up for Russia.88 Wijnkoop found scant support; the 
statutes, presented but not written by Kabakchiev, were adopted 
unanimously. 89 
Business was dispatched at session fifteen on 5 August. Zinoviev's 
report on workers' councils, which included a call for dictatorship, was 
passed virtually without debate.90 On 6 August the same briskness was 
observable. Sylvia Pankhurst, a British communist leader, held up 
things by objecting to the instruction that she and her comrades should 
affiliate their organisation to the British Labour Party. After all that 
Lenin had said about Europe's 'social-chauvinists' and his schismatic 
behaviour in 1917, the British comrades were as much mystified 
as annoyed.91 
Lenin made his last appearance at the Congress in order to drum 
comrade Pankhurst back into line. His argument was that the British 
communists were in danger of remaining a sect and needed to enter the 
mainstream of the labour movement in order to canalise it towards 
communist goals.92 Sylvia Pankhurst's resistance was in vain. By a vote 
 The Tar in the Honey 
131 
of 58 to 24 the British communists were told to join the Labour Party.93 
By the closing rally on 7 August 1920 the Bolsheviks could look back 
on a Congress where no attempt at any basic alteration of their 
imperious proposals had been successful. It was a triumph for 
Bolshevism and for Lenin in particular. The deference verged on the 
embarrassing. Willie Gallacher from Scotland, taken to task by Lenin 
in The Infantile Disease, told the Congress: 'I have found my name 
mentioned in it in connection with my activity. I have taken this rebuke 
as a child takes the rebuke of a father.'94 Perhaps young Willie had his 
tongue in cheek. But the general tone was anyway deferential towards 
Lenin. The Bolsheviks had taken power; they had won their Civil War; 
they were bursting through to Poland and, with luck, would soon be in 
Berlin. Such unpleasantnesses as existed about them would presumably 
be mollified by more cultured socialist revolutions abroad. Lenin and 
friends had breached the walls of global capitalism. Factory owners 
and bankers were the world's worst sinners whereas the Bolsheviks 
could be brought to repent their ways. Long live the October 
Revolution! 
CULT OF A STATESMAN 
Unforced acclaim for Lenin came from the Soviet and foreign delegates 
at the Communist International Congress. Yet official propaganda 
about him had also been made since the October Revolution.95 
Increasingly the central party leaders recognised that their policies 
would have a greater impact on society when refracted through the 
prism of an outstanding political figure. Lenin, as leader of party and 
government, was the obvious subject. It was perceived that a ripost had 
to be made to the propaganda of the White armies. Street posters in the 
regions occupied by Kolchak and Denikin had depicted him as the 
embodiment of evil. Often Lenin, alongside Trotski, was depicted as a 
Jew. His grandfather on his mother's side had indeed been Jewish.96 
But the anti-Bolshevik portraitists did not know this; their intention 
had blatantly been to stir up hostility to the Bolsheviks by playing on 
popular antisemitism. As for Lenin, he did not advertise his ethnic 
ancestry. Neither his Jewish nor his Kalmyk forebears were mentioned 
in public.97 
Information about him was studiously filtered by the party's 
propagandists. A cult of Lenin was in the making. The Communist 
Manifesto had stressed that class struggle was the essence of 
 132 
Lenin: A Political Life 
revolutionary action; and, in the 1850s, Marx had written extensively 
on the impact of broad social interests on the fortunes of great leaders. 
This attitude was superseded after October 1917. The Bolsheviks pulled 
down the memorials to Russian emperors, replacing them with hastily-
commissioned busts and statues of protagonists. Marx, Engels and 
Bakunin were favourite examples.98 There had anyway been a tradition 
within Bolshevism to accentuate the need to train individuals to supply 
the leadership for the achievement of socialism. The Bolshevik 
revolutionary hero belonged to the party's imagery.99 Its rationale 
for focussing attention on the living Lenin was provided by Mikhail 
Olminski, who had written a biographical piece on him for a Moscow 
Bolshevik newspaper in mid-1917 and who in 1918 called for Lenin to 
be studied as the incarnation of 'the colossal revolutionary proletarian 
collective' .100 By then the Bolshevik press had been lavishing regular 
praise on the party's chief. A poem in his honour had been published in 
Pravda as early as 29 October 1917.1°1 An official photograph was 
taken of him in January 1918 and reproduced extensively}02 May Day 
was celebrated in the same year by Demyan Bedny, a Bolshevik 
versifier, with a paean entitled 'To The Leader'. Among Bedny's 
extravagances was the claim that Lenin's writings constituted the Holy 
Bible of Labour. 103 
The attempt on Lenin's life in August 1918 was followed by 
outpourings about his preciousness to the party. A sentimentalised 
account was written by Grigori Zinoviev, who asserted that Lenin had 
undergone penury in Switzerland in service of the revolutionary 
cause. 104 Descriptions of him by others used Christian symbols. Lenin 
was said to have been 'crowned with thorns of slander'; and 
L. S. Sosnovski maintained in a Petrograd newspaper that his survival 
of a Socialist-Revolutionary attack proved that there was something 
beyond the normal about him: 'Lenin cannot be killed.' 105 Elena 
Stasova, who had served before Sverdlov as Central Committee 
secretary, wrote somewhat less disingenuously: 'Don't you know, even 
then I had the same confidence that he would recover, and I simply had 
not a shadow of doubt that it would be so: even though my reason was 
worried by the bad external signs my soul remained calm and declared 
to me that our Ilich would be preserved.' 106 
Lenin did not encourage this overtly. Always embarrassed by the 
fuss made of him, he could also become irritated by it. In March 1919 a 
seventeen-year old girl, Valentina Pershikova, defaced a portrait of him 
and was arrested by the Tsaritsyn Cheka. Lenin demanded her release, 
saying that she should be proceeded against only if she was a counter-
 The Tar in the Honey 
133 
revolutionary. 107 His fiftieth birthday in April 1920 was celebrated 
altogether too splendidly for his taste. The poet Vladimir Mayakovski 
wrote a poem, 'Vladimir Jlich', that generations of Soviet school-
children had to learn by heart. Lenin did not enthuse; his attitude was 
succinctly depicted as follows: 'I don't belong to the admirers of his 
poetic talent, although I quite admit my incompetence in this area.'108 
An evening gathering was held by his Politburo colleagues. Eulogies 
were delivered by Kamenev, Bukharin and Stalin. Lenin made his 
excuses and left in the middle of the proceedings. (His departure itself 
was used cultically in order to indicate how ordinary a fellow he 
was. )109 He continued to avoid taking grandiose titles, remaining mere 
chairman of Sovnarkom and making no attempt to be called prime 
minister or premier; he still led discussions of the Central Committee 
and the Politburo without any formal designation that marked him off 
from his colleagues. It pained him that anyone could think otherwise. 
Adolf Joffe, who had lost his seat on the Central Committee at the 
Eighth Party Congress in 1919, charged him with accruing excessive 
authority. Others had put it more crudely by stating that Lenin had 
become a dictator. 'You're mistaken,' he retorted, 'in repeating (several 
times) that .. the C. C. [Central Committee: RS], c'est moi". This can be 
written only in a condition of great nervous irritation and 
exhaustion.' 110 
Yet the Bolshevik party leader and Sovnarkom chairman did protest 
too much. He did not stop his supporters from naming one of the 
'agitational trains' in his honour; and, while he fastidiously continued 
to refer to the Lenin factory as 'the former Mikhelson factory', he did 
not seek a restoration of the nomenclature. 111 If he had wanted to 
eradicate the cultic paraphernalia, no one could have stood in his way. 
But he weakly demurred, and sometimes even nurtured the growing 
cult, insisting upon participating in a subbotnik on May Day in 1919. 
This was a scheme whereby everyone was encouraged to do a full day's 
extra work without pay. Digging the ground in the Kremlin compound 
was his job for a few hours. The next day's newspapers, as he must 
have anticipated, extolled his dedication. 112 
His tacit calculation must have been that the publicly-fostered 
veneration was a political asset which he could not afford to discard. It 
helped the Soviet state and, whenever he was challenged by his 
colleagues, it assisted him. And yet he can hardly be accused of 
overdoing things on his own behalf. On his return to Russia in 1917 he 
had been inventive in fashioning his message and his image under the 
scrutiny of public opinion. He did not stop trying to identify himself 
 134 
Lenin: A Political Life 
with the working class after the October Revolution. 'We, the workers' 
continued to be one of his rhetorical flourishes; its autobiographical 
inaccuracy for the son of a distinguished provincial civil servant who 
had passed his noble status on to him was overlooked. Lenin also went 
on wearing his workman's peaked cap, which had been effective in 
winning popularity at mass meetings in 1917.113 And, despite the 
worries about his security, he continued to make occasional speeches at 
workplaces and to mingle with the groups of factory workers. 
Furthermore, he appreciated the potency of modern mass media 
enough to agree to be filmed walking around in the grounds of the 
Kremlin with his personal assistant Vladimir Bonch-Bruevich after 
recovering from the assassination attempt. Lenin decided, too, to put 
some speeches on gramophone records. In 1919 he specially wrote six 
short pieces and delivered them in a specially-constructed studio. 114 
These were pioneering events in the history of politics and the media 
only in retrospect: their impact at the time was negligible. The newsreel 
was hardly a success. It had been weeks after his arrival in Petrograd in 
1917 before Lenin acquired an ease before crowds, and he never 
learned how to relax in front of the camera. He was nearly as diffident 
on the records of his speeches: his stilted diction gives no impression of 
the oratorical zest witnessed by audiences in these years. More to the 
point, the Russian film industry was in its infancy and supplies of 
celluloid and other equipment were small in the Civil War; and only a 
tiny proportion of the population owned gramophones. 11s 
It is true that his name was appended at the bottom of most laws and 
decrees, and that his articles were carried regularly by Pravda and 
lzvestiya. His photograph was more common in the public domain 
than anyone else's. And yet the Soviet republic had a predominantly 
agrarian economy, was poorly served by its network of transport and 
communication and had been battered by the effects of the Civil War. 
Knowledge about Lenin was perforce restricted. The ubiquitousness of 
the 'Lenin cult' was therefore a mainly posthumous phenomenon. 
After the failure of a gang of armed robbers to recognise him in 1919, 
Lenin was unlikely to overestimate the impact of official propagan-
da. 116 Nevertheless the situation was not static. Not only many workers 
but probably even more peasants held him in affection. The old 
tradition whereby a village would send one of its elders to the capital to 
seek an audience with the emperor was continued with Sovnarkom's 
chairman. Lenin was becoming as much 'the little father' to the 
peasantry as Nicholas 11. 117 This phenomenon did not mean that most 
peasants were consciously pro-Bolshevik. The countryside witnessed 
 The Tar in the Honey 
135 
revolts against the Reds throughout the Civil War and immediately 
afterwards. But approval of the Land Decree of 26 October 1917 
persisted; and, almost certainly, the popular notion had not died that 
political and economic problems were caused not by the ruler but by 
his advisers at court. 
In reality Lenin was crucially responsible for several policies which 
aggrieved the peasantry. But he was not universally perceived in such a 
fashion. The Land Decree was popularly known as 'Lenin's Decree'. 
Fondness for him among broad strata of society was to increase still 
further in 1921 when he introduced a New Economic Policy which 
permitted a limited revival of the private grain trade. 1 18 
Even the fact that this permission was extracted from Lenin against 
the resistance of his prejudices was not counted against him. He 
escaped a fair verdict on his record. It is as if he was venerated despite 
himself. His personal modesty gave the impression to many who met 
him at Party Congresses or at Kremlin audiences that he was a truly a 
fitting ruler in the era of mass politics. Visitors overlooked evidence 
pointing in the opposite direction: his middle-class background; his 
dogmatically intellectualist outlook; his willingness to order the deaths 
of thousands of people, including workers and peasants, who stood in 
the way of his party's demands. Lenin was not an ordinary Russian. 
Lenin did not share the aspirations of ordinary Russians. In most ways 
he was disappointed that Russians were not more like the Germans! 
But enough Russians were unaware of his general attitude for him to 
appear as a demotic tsar. It was a paradoxical result for a revolutionary 
who, as a youngster, had started to think about politics when his older 
brother had been hanged for trying to assassinate the emperor 
Aleksandr III and eradicate tsarism from the Russian land. Lenin 
had dedicated his own life to the achievement of a communist society. 
He was being placed on a pedestal of esteem at a stratospheric height 
above the eyes of the common man and woman. 
THE NINTH PARTY CONFERENCE 
To leading communists, at home and abroad, he was equally heroic; 
but some of them also found him extremely enigmatic. Paul Levi, the 
theoretician of the German Communist Party, had been startled by his 
encounter with the Bolshevik leader at the Second Congress of the 
Communist International. Levi thought that, if a non-communist 
government in Berlin were to go to war against the Allies, his own 
 136 
Lenin: A Political Life 
party should refrain from involvement. 119 Lenin, however, remon-
strated that German communists should even form what he called 'an 
unnatural bloc' with the extreme political right in such a contingency. 
The ex-army officers under Wolfgang Kapp, who had attempted to 
seize power in March 1920, should be welcomed as partners. According 
to Lenin, Kapp and his associates differed from Russian counter-
revolutionaries in the crucial respect that they were determined to 
overthrow the treaty of Versailles. 120 A German anti-Allies campaign 
would therefore be a war of national liberation. Once it had been won, 
the German Communist Party in turn would resume the political 
offensive against the German bourgeoisie. 121 
That Lenin should have impressed this upon Levi was remarkable 
enough: the advocate of'European civil war' in 1914-1917 had become 
the supporter of a Burgfrieden between the German bourgeoisie and 
working class. 122 Even more stunning was the timing of his argument. 
At that moment the Red Army was thrusting its forces into Poland. 
Not only Warsaw but also Berlin was its objective. Lenin sensed that 
the long-awaited pan-European revolution was imminent. A seizure of 
power by Italian communists seemed likely to him, and he had written 
to Stalin in July that Bukharin and Zinoviev agreed with this 
assessment. 123 Lenin was already thinking about the practicalities: 
'My personal opinion,' he confided, 'is that for this purpose it is 
necessary to sovietise Hungary and perhaps Czechia and Romania 
too.' 124 Such grandiose thinking about the political map of Europe was 
not altogether lightheaded. Northern Italy at the time was convulsed 
with working-class strikes and factory occupations. Nor was Lenin 
oblivious of the difficulties. In particular, his altercations with Levi 
showed a recognition that socialist revolution in Germany might be 
more difficult to bring about than elsewhere. And his strategical 
deviousness was reminiscent of Stalin's Nazi-Soviet Pact of 1939. For 
Lenin was willing to do a deal with the kind of militarists who would 
become Nazis by the end of the decade. 125 
In the meantime there was no more enthusiastic proponent of the 
invasion of Poland than Lenin. This required an all-out military effort, 
and Trotski objected that the Reds were simply in no fit condition for 
such an exhausting task. 126 Stalin, too, warned against the nationalism 
of Polish workers; for him, Lenin exaggerated the ability of the Red 
Army to detach the Warsaw working class from support for 
patriotism.'27 Kamenev was out of the country, on a mission to 
London. Polish comrades, including the same Jan Marchlewski who 
had been seconded for the invasion from the Communist International 
 The Tar in the Honey 
137 
Congress, sensed that a mistake was being made. 128 Karl Radek, an 
astute observer of central European politics, also tried to dissuade 
Lenin. 129 But on a rare visit from the front to Moscow, Trotski could 
find only Rykov to back his own opposition to opening an offensive; 
and Rykov came over to Lenin's side once the invasion had been 
started. 130 If the Brest-Litovsk treaty was one man's peace, this was 
one man's war. 131 
It went disastrously wrong despite early successes. The two Red 
sectors fought independently of each other. Stalin in the south aimed at 
Lvov while Tukhachevski drove onwards, in the north, in the direction 
of Warsaw. This dispersal of effort caused chaos. 132 But in any case the 
Poles rose against the Reds in a massive national effort. They assumed 
that the Bolsheviks were internationalist in ideology but Russians in 
intention. This notion was given credence by the summons of the anti-
Bolshevik General Brusilov, in retirement since 1917, and to all 
Russian officers to rally to the Russian flag in the country's hour of 
need. Furthermore, the lines of communication and supply for the Red 
Army were overstretched. Trotski had anticipated that the Poles would 
prove more redoubtable than Kolchak, Denikin and Yudenich. At the 
battle of the Vistula, in mid-August 1920, he was proved completely 
correct. 133 
Throughout the campaign Lenin had thrust the Red Army into an 
aggressive posture. Lord Curzon, British Foreign Secretary, had 
proposed peace along prescribed boundaries between Soviet Russia 
and Poland on 12 July.' 34 For Lenin this necessitated simply a 'mad 
reinforcement of the attack on Poland'. 135 Trotski's counsel in favour of 
peace negotiations was overturned. 136 Lenin demanded that a militant 
manifesto should be issued. 137 The British in mid-August had tried to 
lean on the Polish authorities to accept Soviet peace terms (but Lloyd 
George was unaware that these would involve the setting up of a 
workers' militia and the redistribution of the land among the 
peasantry). Lenin was determined to press on to Warsaw and then to 
Berlin. He noted with satisfaction in mid-August that the Reds had 
reached the borders of East Prussia. 138 On the same day he telegrammed 
sarcastically to his forces: 'The Commander-in-Chief does not dare get 
nervous. If the military department or the Commander-in-Chief does 
not refuse to take Warsaw, it is necessary to take it.'139 The battle of the 
Vistula brought the ruler in the Kremlin to his senses. European 
revolution was not, after all, going to be exported on the point of Red 
bayonets. The Bolsheviks themselves would have to sue for peace. The 
Soviet-Polish war had ended in catastrophe. 140 
 138 
Lenin: A Political Life 
At last the lid placed on internal Bolshevik disputes was blown off. 
The pressure-cooker had been under dangerous strain all year, and the 
start of the Ninth Party Conference on 22 September 1920 was watched 
nervously by the central party leaders as the 116 delegates with voting 
authority assembled. 141 The military situation exercised all minds. 
Unusually the right of making the first report was given to a non-
member of the Bolshevik party: the obscure Polish communist 
Wladislaw Ulanowski. His words made plain the extent of the 
catastrophe that had befallen the Red Army. 142 Ulanowski's presence 
was intended to help Lenin and his colleagues to rebut criticism for 
ordering the advance on Warsaw. 
Lenin was fortunate that scarcely any delegates knew that he was the 
main instigator of this advance. In his political report on behalf of the 
Central Committee he argued that the peace terms proposed by the 
Soviet government in January 1920 had been interpreted by the Polish 
government and its friends as a sign of weakness. This was the 
motivation, according to Lenin, for Pilsudski's incursion into the 
Ukraine. The advance on Warsaw, which Lenin described unreservedly 
as a 'war of offensive', showed how wrong Pilsudski had been. Small 
states like Estonia and Georgia, despite what was called by Lenin their 
bourgeois orientation, had made peace with Moscow. Lenin rightly 
noted that 'all Germany was on the boil' as the Reds attempted 'the 
sovietisation of Poland'. The objective had been to 'feel out with 
bayonets'. The decision had been taken at the Second Congress of the 
Communist International, but had to be kept secret since so many 
participants were 'nationalists and pacifists'. But all ended in disaster. 
Lenin admitted that the Poland's 'readiness' for revolution had been 
overestimated. He also conceded: 'I absolutely in no way in the 
slightest pretend to knowing military science.' Lenin allowed that 
diplomatic mistakes might have been made. And yet he insisted that 
military victory had been at least a possibility. He complained about 
the refusal of the German communists to link up with the 'German 
Kornilovites'; and he continued to ignore the fact that Polish workers 
as well as 'petit-bourgeois elements' had risen up against the Red Army 
invaders. Even in defeat there had been gains. In Britain the 
revolutionary cause was gaining working-class support through the 
'Committee of Action'. The Bolsheviks could sue for peace from a 
position of strength. 143 
In the heavily-abridged version of his speech in Pravda, which 
appeared fully a week later, he avoided terms such as 'sovietisation of 
Poland' and 'war of offensive'. Nor did he refer to his astonishing 
 The Tar in the Honey 
139 
advice to the German Communist Party. He maintained, moreover, 
that the Soviet economy was improving and that the anti-Soviet 
alliance of Poland, France and the Russian Whites was being disrupted 
by conflicting aims. If the Polish government refused Moscow's terms, 
war would be resumed and would result in a Red victory. At the 
Conference, by contrast, he acknowledged that a winter campaign 
would cost too many lives. 144 Lenin, by means of Pravda, was seeking 
to deceive foreign embassies into believing that the Red Army could 
and would fight on regardless. 145 There were other reasons for self-
censorship in print. Subsequent speeches referred to his indications 
about the series of mistakes made in the Polish campaign. 146 Delegates 
who had come to the Conference to rebuke the central party leadership 
as a whole witnessed a verbal brawl between two individual leaders, 
Lenin and Stalin. The proceedings looked as if they were running out 
of control. 
Kamenev, whose speech was also edited for public consumption, 
kept clear of personal unpleasantness when reporting to Conference on 
the international situation. He had just returned from a diplomatic visit 
to England, and was able to emphasise that the decisions on the Polish 
campaign had been taken in his absence. 147 This neatly removed him 
from the dispute between Lenin and Stalin and from the controversy as 
to whether the order to march on Warsaw should ever have been given. 
Kamenev was listened to attentively. His had been the first trip abroad 
by a major Bolshevik figure since before the October Revolution (and 
it is worth noting by comparison that Lenin, an inveterate traveller 
before 1917, made no foreign excursion for the rest of his life; indeed he 
travelled no further than from Moscow to Petrograd on any particular 
occasion). Kamenev warned that the Committee of Action in England 
was constituted by anti-Bolsheviks. 148 He was pouring cold water on 
the interpretation of the situation abroad given earlier by Lenin. He did 
this so decorously that few delegates can have appreciated the extent of 
the anti-Lenin criticism in the Central Committee. Trotski was 
similarly equivocal in his report on the military fronts. Only hints of 
his worries were offered. He reminded the Conference that the danger 
from Wrangel was as great as had been posed by the Polish armed 
forces, and that other fronts still existed in the Soviet republic: in the 
Caucasus, in Turkestan and by Lake Baikal. 149 While announcing 
support for the original determination to go for Warsaw, he 
accentuated the dangers involved. To be a revolutionary was to take 
risks. The Red Army had in fact been routed; but, according to Trotski 
at the Conference, this had been unforeseeable (even though he had, 
 140 
Lenin: A Political Life 
months beforehand, foreseen it).150 He explicitly refused to sound an 
optimistic note. If a winter campaign was necessary, so be it. Yet 
Trotski wanted, if at all possible, peace on the Western front. 151 
Trotski made plain that he held Stalin responsible for some 
'strategical mistakes' .152 He had not contended that the whole scheme 
to press on to Warsaw had been erroneous. The Politburo was sensitive 
on this score, and Bela Kun was introduced at the Conference's second 
session to declare on behalf of Hungarian communists that the 
invasion of Poland had very nearly brought communism to central 
Europe.153 Central Committee member Karl Radek refused to gag 
himself on this matter, declaring that the advocates of invasion had 
grossly exaggerated the revolutionary inclinations of workers in 
Germany, France and Britain; he implicated Lenin in the blame! 54 
Radek loosened the tongues of others. M. M. Khataevich asserted that 
the central leaders had been intoxicated by their previous military 
successes. 155 K. K. Yurenev accused the Central Committee of having 
offered 'a policy of impressionism'. The likely reaction of Poles had not 
been properly explored, and the Red Army had been poorly equipped 
and led! 56 
Felix Kon, member of the Polish Revolutionary Committee, 
described the invasion as ilt-prepared. 157 He revealed that the central 
party leaders and not Polish communists such as Kon had taken all the 
crucial decisions. D. V. Poluyan boiled over at this point: the invasion 
had been a blunder from start to finish. Polish nationalism had been 
totally ignored.158 S. K. Minin, serving as political commissar with the 
First Cavalry Army, charged Lenin with evading basic questions. 159 
Similar accusations were made by following speakers;160 and 1.1. 
Khodorovski added that the directive for an advance on Warsaw 
would never have been issued if central leaders had kept contact with 
local party committees.161 Bukharin was put up to deflect the flak. 
Invoking Marx and The Communist Manifesto, he declared that policy 
should be based upon the priority to foster worldwide socialist 
revolution. Bukharin threw a foul punch with the claim that Radek's 
imprecations meant he was 'crossing over to a Kautskyite position'. 
Revolutionary wars were correct in principle; revolutionary crises were 
growing in Italy and elsewhere. The revolutionary administration of 
Russia was right to attempt to stimulate the outbreak of European 
socialist revolution. 162 Stalin, too, defended the Central Committee; 
but he acknowledged that a lack of co-ordination had damaged the 
campaign. 163 Dzierzynski, who had been said to have questioned the 
thinking behind the invasion, stepped forward to rebut this (even 
 The Tar in the Honey 
141 
though there was much truth in it!). 164 Radek once more insisted that 
the attitude of the Polish workers had been misjudged. 165 At this point 
Kamenev defended the Central Committee with an original argument: 
namely that the intention had been to stimulate a German socialist 
revolution and that geography entailed a march across Poland 
regardless of the Polish working-class's attitude to the Red Army. 166 
But there was no avoiding the central fact: miscalculations had been 
made and had led to a defeat (or 'expanded negative victory', as Radek 
put it in a parody of Bukharin's extraordinary description of economic 
collapse as 'expanded negative production'). 167 Nerves were snapped 
when Trotski blurted out a critique of Stalin's activities. Stalin, 
according to Trotski, had misled the Central Committee into believing 
that the Polish army retreating towards Warsaw was incapable of 
further resistance. 168 Lenin joined the assault on Stalin. The 
implication was that Stalin had been ambitious to take command of 
the entire Red campaign. 169 Not since his condemnation of Kamenev 
and Zinoviev for alleged political black-legging before the October 
Revolution had Lenin made so personal an attack on a colleague. The 
Conference descended into shambles as the second session closed at II 
o'clock in the evening. 
Next day, on 23 September, Stalin insisted upon the right to reply to 
Lenin and Trotski. Neither Lenin nor Trotski deigned to respond. 
Stalin had not denied that he had been responsible for strategical and 
operational blunders, but informed the Conference - and here he 
touched a sensitive spot for Lenin- that he had expressed doubts about 
the campaign when it had first been contemplated. 170 In order to save 
the leaders from further embarrassment it was decided to move to the 
next item of business, Krestinski's organisational report for the Central 
Committee. The statistical information was accompanied by a 
complaint that local party committees seldom appreciated the strains 
of work in Moscow. Shortage of personnel, caused by mobilisations 
and ill-health, was perennial. Krestinski had tried to take provincial 
grievances seriously, and wanted to defend himself in advance. 171 This 
did not save him. Democratic Centralists T.V. Sapronov and 
K. G. Zavyalova made their usual complaints. 172 Political departments 
were bitterly resented. If Stalin had suffered worst on the first day, 
Trotski was now put under threat since he was the principal advocate 
of such departments. Lenin, escaping much censure in the debate on 
the Polish campaign, continued to evade blame in discussions of 
Krestinski's report. The rancour was directed at others. Perhaps Lenin 
would not have offended so many fellow Bolsheviks even if he had been 
 142 
Lenin: A Political Life 
given one of the 'dirty' jobs in the Red Army done by Trotski and 
Stalin. But he had given out the jobs, not received them. 
His wish to stand above unnecessary controversy was displayed in 
the ensuing debate 'on the immediate tasks of the party' in the fourth 
session on 24 September. Zinoviev stated bluntly: 'The chief conclusion 
of the proletarian revolution is the need for an iron, organised and 
monolithic party.' 173 A split between the top and the bottom of the 
party was rejected by him as nonsensical exaggeration. Insofar as 
problems of authoritarianism existed, Zinoviev maintained, they were 
attributable to the objective pressures exerted by the party's post-
October functions in government and military command. He reminded 
the Conference that Lenin had warned that communism was not 
achievable overnight and that economic and political inequalities in 
society would persist for an epoch. Zinoviev argued that unequal 
conditions would prevail in the party in the same years. 174 
Dispute flared up, and Zinoviev was the target of invective. 
Sapronov reiterated his complaints: about the organisational reprisals 
against the Democratic Centralists; about the secrecy surrounding the 
discussions of the local committees as well as the central party 
apparatus; about the authoritarian methods rampant throughout the 
party. Bureaucratic centralism reigned. 175 Zinoviev was fortunate 
inasmuch as his critics were divided. The Democratic Centralists 
thought the standpoint of the Workers' Opposition, which called for 
working-class rank-and-file party members to have a decisive impact 
on policy and for the working class as a whole to control all economic 
production and distribution, was demagogy. Y. K. Lutovinov and the 
Workers' Opposition replied that the Democratic Centralists behaved 
no differently from supporters of Lenin in their local party 
committees. 176 The exchanges between Sapronov and Lutovinov 
eased Zinoviev's task. He also proffered a resolution which went 
some way towards the demands of those who attacked him. He 
expressed concern about the decline of electivity to party offices and of 
open mass meetings of local party organisations. He envisaged the 
establishment of 'control commissions' in the party to ensure that 
abuses would be eradicated. 177 But Lenin intervened only briefly, 
opining that the Central Committee's attackers were not so much 
demagogic as simply exhausted. 178 The fact that this was not regarded 
as condescension demonstrates his prestige. 
Even so, he was rather complacent in strongly implying that internal 
party reform was of little consequence at a time when factory workers 
were under-fed and Red Army soldiers were worn out by campaign 
 The Tar in the Honey 
143 
after campaign. 179 Sapronov reasonably questioned whether the 
proposed changes in the party would be implemented. 180 Zinoviev 
shared Lenin's coolness about the reform, but the fury of his opponents 
had induced him to disguise his feelings. Lenin had very nearly 
destroyed the effectiveness of Zinoviev's duplicity. What saved the two 
of them was the limitation on time for further debate. The motion had 
to be handed over to a commission of elected delegates, including both 
Zinoviev and Sapronov, for elaboration. 181 
Zinoviev had survived his ordeal, but not without inadvertently 
unhelpful assistance from his revered leader. Next day started with the 
sixth session's discussion on the Second Communist International 
Congress. The report by Zinoviev was self-congratulatory. He boasted 
that the Central Committee had had the Congress on its agenda for the 
previous three months; and that most problems at the Congress had 
related to decisions on which foreign organisations were to be allowed 
to join. He teased Radek for having wanted to exclude all non-Marxist 
groups; 182 but he simultaneously accentuated the Central Committee's 
aim to keep tight control of the Communist International. The initially-
proposed nine conditions for membership had been increased to twenty 
one for this purpose. 183 Furthermore, Zinoviev had no doubts about 
the correctness of the decision to invade Poland. He recalled that, in the 
corridors of the Congress, he had canvassed non-Soviet participants to 
take more active steps to support the Bolsheviks. 'Hands off Russia!' 
was too passive a slogan. 184 He referred frequently to Germany. A 
seizure of power there by socialists continued to be regarded as crucial 
to the flourishing of the Soviet regime, and Clara Zetkin was invited to 
address the Party Conference in connection with recent developments. 
Zetkin had in the past been on poor terms with Lenin; her refusal to 
release the funds from the Shmidt legacy before the First World War, 
when she had been one of the legacy's three trustees, had mightily 
annoyed him. 185 By 1920 she had become an admirer of the Bolshevik 
leader. So reliable a foreign supporter was useful in rebutting the 
objections by Conference delegates themselves to the waging of the 
Polish campaign. 186 
Radek was like a terrier. Snapping away at the heels of Zinoviev and 
- not so discreetly - Lenin, he noted how the caution of the Bolshevik 
central party leadership about the possibility of imminent socialist 
revolution in Europe had changed abruptly into extraordinary 
optimism as the Red Army advanced into Poland. This transforma-
tion on the spur of the moment resulted from a new mood in Moscow, 
but was no basis for assessing the international situation. 187 Radek 
 144 
Lenin: A Political Life 
defended himself against a previous charge that, out of sectarianism, he 
had allied himself with anti-Zetkin German communists not wanting to 
invite non-communist leftist socialists to the Komintem Congress. 
This, he stated, was untrue; and he added that Lenin's own The 
Infantile Disease, published shortly before the Congress, had had the 
purpose of pushing away those leftists who were not entirely adherents 
of Bolshevik party policies. If Lenin's idea had been to attract as many 
leftists to Moscow as possible, why attack Anton Pannekoek and 
others so viciously in print? The problem was the absence of a fully-
considered policy deriving from broad discussion rather than from 
command from on high. 188 
At last someone was infringing party decorum: 'I know this isn't a 
popular thing, to speak against this or that line of the Central 
Committee, all the more if it is Vladimir llich who is predetermining 
the line.' 189 The blame for overestimating the chances of immediate 
success for European socialist revolution was laid at Lenin's door. 
Bukharin tried to rehearse the arguments already put by Zinoviev while 
Lenin kept silent. 190 The end of the Conference's sixth session gave the 
central party leaders an intermission to consider how to handle 
Radek's attack. In the evening the seventh and last session began. N. 
Osinski, a Democratic Centralist, exculpated the Central Committee of 
political charges and declared that the failiure of the Warsaw offensive 
stemmed from personal tensions among Trotski, Stalin and Smilga. 191 
Radek, however, refused to shut up. Accused of unwarranted 
pessimism, he reminded the Conference that it had been leaders such 
as Kamenev and Zinoviev who had opposed the Bolshevik seizure of 
power in October 1917.192 The wrangling between Radek and Zinoviev 
continued for some minutes. Then Radek, having managed to tell a few 
home truths, let the matter rest. Zinoviev, despite being the Central 
Committee's rapporteur, let Kamenev proffer the motion of support for 
the Central Committee's conduct in relations with the Communist 
International; and even Kamenev was diffident enough to get Bela Kun 
to co-sign the motion with him. 193 
The shambles continued. Zinoviev's commission to formulate a 
resolution on 'the current tasks of the party' had not met. Permission 
was obtained for the commission to present a version to the Central 
Committee within two days. 194 Lenin's political report, which had 
opened the Conference, was not even voted upon. This had not 
happened since before the October Revolution. Even more extra-
ordinary was Lenin's absence from the last session. Zinoviev was left to 
draw the proceedings to an end: 'Young comrades who happen to be 
 The Tar in the Honey 
145 
participating in a Conference for the first time must be told that in no 
case whatsoever should it be concluded from the fact that one or 
another comrade has come out against another that we have major 
disagreements or arguments which prevent friendly work.' 195 But 
where was Lenin? According to Zinoviev, news of a Polish military 
counter-offensive had just come through to Moscow. 196 Perhaps Lenin 
was detained at his Kremlin telephone or was conferring with the Red 
Army command; he was not so cowardly as to avoid unpleasantries 
from an audience. Whatever the reason, he and his associates had been 
given a mauling by their fellow delegates that they would not forget. 
NOTING BUKHARIN 
Lenin would have paid little heed to the Conference in any event. For, 
as the threat of renewed conflict with Poland receded in the following 
few days, he turned to questions of Marxist theory rather than 
Conference resolutions. Naturally his duties as Sovnarkom chairman 
cut back his time for writing. Nevertheless he sustained a passionate 
interest in Marxism. It provided relief from the difficulties of the day; 
but it also remained a crucial means for him to interpret the world and 
rationalise his policies and behaviour. Thus, however overworked he 
became, he regularly used his prerogative to order any book he liked 
from any Russian library and to acquire foreign publications from the 
country's official representatives abroad. But his bibliophilia did not 
signify intellectual open-mindedness. He had always had strong 
preferences and dislikes; and, after the turn of the century, he had 
never seen the point of expending energy on the notions propounded 
by other parties both socialist and anti-socialist. In his own party, the 
rival acceptable theorists became fewer. Schisms among Russian 
Marxists before 1914 led him to cease to show respect for 
Plekhanov, Trotski, Martov, Maslov, Zhordania and Bogdanov. 
Then came the Great War. Lenin broke with most socialist parties in 
the rest of Europe; and he wrote no large work without a section 
criticising Karl Kautsky. It is true that practically all prominent 
Bolsheviks, including those of a practical bent like Stalin, had 
pretensions as Marxist theorists. Kamenev and Zinoviev had several 
books to their credit. Trotski, moreover, had returned to Lenin's side 
and was a political thinker of distinction among Bolsheviks. Never-
theless Lenin paid them little heed, reading their books but not 
adjusting his ideas much in reaction. 197 
 146 
Lenin: A Political Life 
The single Bolshevik who figured in his mind as a commensurate 
theorist was Nikolai Bukharin. Lenin had followed his career in the 
Great War with almost fatherly care. His protege had disappointed 
him, in 1916, when their views on the strategy for socialist revolution 
had diverged. But in 1917 they agreed about more than they disagreed 
about. This continued to be the case after the October Revolution. 
Lenin was to remark in his so-called 'testament' in December 1922 that 
Bukharin was 'the most valuable and greatest theoretician in the 
party•.l911 
And yet Lenin, while acknowledging Bukharin's gifts, had doubts 
whether he understood Marxism. Bukharin was not unique in incurring 
such suspicion. It will be recalled that Lenin in his notebooks in 1916 
had asserted that 'not one Marxist has completely understood Marx in 
the past half-century'. 199 Thenceforward Lenin felt himself to be the 
only true propagator and developer of Marxism in the twentieth 
century. He never stated this. But his critical remarks in the margin of 
Bukharin's book The Economics of the Transition Period indicate that 
he had not changed in his self-perception.200 The problem, according to 
Lenin, was the influence of Aleksandr Bogdanov upon Bukharin. 
Bogdanov and Lenin had fought a political and philosophical battle in 
1908-1909, ending with an organisational schism between their 
respective supporters in the Bolshevik faction. Lenin had several 
cardinal objections to him. Bogdanov had denied the existence of the 
'external world' independently of human cognition; he had introduced 
non-Marxist ideas, especially from neo-Kantianism, to his analysis of 
social phenomena; and he had refused to accept that Marx's Capital 
was an unchallengeable building block of knowledge, and had derided 
the attainability of absolute truth.2°1 On only one of these objections 
did Lenin later change his mind. In 1915-1916, writing in his own 
Notebooks on Philosophy he came to see that absolute truth was an 
impossibility.202 But otherwise he retained his anti-Bogdanovist 
animus, and Bogdanov's name appears more often than any other in 
the expletive-laden commentary by Lenin in the margins of Bukharin's 
book.203 Lenin had forgiven Bukharin his alleged anarchism in the 
Great War (and indeed had recognised that the allegation was 
unfounded). 204 He had forgiven him his Left Communism in 1918.205 
And now to find that the heterodoxy lay deeper, that Bukharin was a 
crypto-Bogdanovist! The discovery was unbearable! The heresy must 
be rooted out, and Bukharin brought to his senses! 
Bukharin's style was bad enough. It was full of meandering syntax 
and waffly terminology. Lenin adopted an ironical stance: 'Ooot1 Oh! 
 The Tar in the Honey 
147 
Watch out!'206 He had a point. Lenin himself wrote in the jargon of 
contemporary Marxism, often with tedious prolixity; but he would 
never have allowed himself to refer, for example, to wartime economic 
collapse as 'expanded negative reproduction'207 or to the effects of 
Bolshevik policy in 1918-1920 as 'the resurrection of industry in a 
socialist formu1ation'. 208 Lenin offered dozens of emendations to this 
stylistic archness, and generally criticised Bukharin for 'playing at 
definitions' and 'playing with concepts'.209 
The 'Old Man' of Bolshevism felt that substantial questions, too, 
were at stake. Bukharin's terms gave him away as a believer in false 
gods. The book's introduction asserted that Marx's ideas exhibited 'a 
method whose heuristic value has only now risen to its full gigantic 
height'.210 This plaudit seemed dispraise to Lenin, and his reaction 
besmattered the page: 'Only "heuristic value"'n And not reflecting the 
objective world? [fhis is] "shameful" ... agnosticisml'211 Marx, in 
Lenin's estimation, had to be revered as a theorist innocent of error. 
Bukharin's remaining chapters evinced further manifestations of 
Bogdanovism. He frequently implied hostility to Lenin's cherished 
notion that the 'external world' exists independently of human 
cognition.212 Picking some bits of Marx while discarding others and 
even incorporating ideas from non-Marxist thinkers, Bukharin had 
committed the crime of eclecticism. 213 There were only two acceptable 
founts of wisdom: Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels. Bukharin had 
betrayed the faith, and Lenin offered summary judgement. Bukharin, 
he proposed, was guilty of subjectivism, of solipsism, of agnosticism. 214 
Lenin continued to contend that, in philosophy, a dyke separated 
materialism from idealism. Bukharin had allegedly moved over to 
idealism. His position on the far bank from Lenin was indicated in a 
'scholasticism of terms contradicting dia[lectica1] mat[eralism] (i.e. 
Marxism)'.215 Lenin closely read and annotated Bukharin's book, but 
he abbreviated his comments in order to slake his intense annoyance. 
Supposedly Bukharin, the party's most widely respected theoretician 
after Lenin, was not even a pukka Marxist. Lenin tried to sugar the pill. 
He emphasised how much he liked the 'excellent' chapter on 'extra-
economic compulsion';216 and he also put comments like 'true' and 
'sehr gut' at various earlier points in the book.217 Even several of 
Bukharin's definitions were to Lenin's liking. The phrase that state 
power was 'concentrated and organised social force' appealed to Lenin. 
He warmly greeted the description of the state in general as 'the 
broadest organisation of a class where all its force is concentrated, 
where the instruments of pressure and repression are concentrated. '218 
 148 
Lenin: A Political Life 
Lenin's recensio academica contained the following headline: 'A 
spoonful of tar in a barrel of honey.'219 
Yet who but a fool would sup from such a barrel? However lightly 
Lenin tried to let Bukharin down and however enthusiastically he 
affirmed that the book contained only a 'small inadequacy' (and 
needed only twenty to thirty pages excised),220 the fundamental 
criticism was not withdrawn. The passages admired by Lenin were 
confined to his observations on the desirability of strong state power in 
enforcing revolutionary order. These alleviated Lenin's concern lest 
Bukharin should go over not only to Bogdanov's philosophy but even 
to his political recommendations; for Bogdanov had always con-
demned the violence and illegitimacy of the October Revolution.221 
Nevertheless there were worrisome aspects to the book even in relation 
to the level of current party policies. These aspects were but lightly 
drawn, but Lenin was alert to them. In the first place, there were 
Bukharin's repeated Eositive references to 'sociology': always a term 
spat out by Lenin.2 2 Unlike Bukharin, Lenin regarded twentieth-
century sociologists as bourgeois apologists who harmed the socialist 
cause. Bukharin by contrast found some of their ideas inspiring. He 
was no different from Lenin in insisting that the ultimate key to social 
analysis was class. But he also saw sense in breaking classes down into 
'groups' and 'groupings' .223 For Lenin, this was tantamount to 
recognising that sociologists such as Max Weber and Roberto Michels 
who had accentuated the importance of status over economic condition 
had been right and Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels wrong. Heretical 
and incorrect notions on society and economics would inevitably 
result. 
Lenin's views on epistemology and ontology were sincere, but crude 
and unconvincing. His powerful intellect had not been fully engaged 
with the problems he chose to assess so magisterially, and his prejudices 
were by now so barnacled as to leave no hope for removal. 224 
Bukharin's ideas, too, were confused and over-confident; but at least 
he sought to take account of social sciences as they had developed 
around the world since the death of Marx and Engels. Lenin was 
undaunted: in September 1920 he determined to re-enter the 
philosophical fray by sanctioning a second edition of his 1909 
philosophical philippic Materialism and Empiriocriticism. He made 
no more than minor modifications in a text which affirmed all his 
objections to the world-view of Aleksandr Bogdanov.225 
The introduction written for this new edition mentioned Bogdanov; 
but Bukharin was an equal, if unnamed, target as Lenin renewed the 
 The Tar in the Honey 
149 
intra-Bolshevik dispute on philosophy.226 Lenin was motivated not 
only by the intellectual issues but also by their connection with current 
political discussions in the party about the working class. Among the 
objects of his concerns was the mass organisation known as Proletkult. 
This organisation had been founded by Bogdanov as an instrument 
whereby the working class might independently establish its own 
'proletarian culture' and supplant the prevailing 'bourgeois culture'. Its 
claim to have 400,000 active members was probably exaggerated. But 
the Bolshevik party's claim to have hundreds of thousands of working-
class members was accompanied by the acknowledgement that most of 
them had no active role in party life. Above all, Proletkult disliked the 
tutelage exercised by the party over all mass organisations. Workers, 
according to Bogdanov, had to take charge of their own present and 
future affairs; and he tied these recomendations to his viewpoint on 
ontology and epistemology.227 This was anathema to Lenin as a 
strategy of revolutionary change, and he derided Bogdanov's ideas on 
'proletarian culture' as themselves being 'bourgeois and reaction-
ary•.22H 
The necessity for the working class to undergo cultural development 
after the October Revolution had been asserted by Lenin in The State 
and Revolution in mid-1917.229 But he wanted the party to direct the 
development, and his experience since the October Revolution 
reinforced this strong tendency in his thought. Bukharin, too, 
supported the notion of the party as the vanguard of the working 
class and the central party apparatus as the vanguard of the party. He 
had repeated this notion, so repugnant to Bogdanov, in his Economics 
of the Transition Period; his passages on the theme attracted plaudits 
from Lenin.230 
Yet Bukharin had his own vision of a 'proletarian culture' none the 
less. He wanted culture under socialism to break decisively with the 
culture of the bourgeoisie, which he deemed inimical to socialism and 
to the interests of the working class. No art or even science, to 
Bukharin's mind, was innocent of ideological orientation.231 Bogda-
novism was detectable here, as Bukharin acknowledged.232 Lenin tried 
to intimidate Bukharin back into line. His attack was indirect. Since 
Bogdanov professed a tight link between his own epistemological and 
political standpoints, Lenin tried to undermine Bukharin's attitude to 
'proletarian culture' by enquiring provocatively about his attitude to 
philosophy. In particular, he asked for Bukharin's reaction to the 
second edition of Materialism and Empiriocriticism.233 Bukharin 
refused to play Lenin's game. He also suggested that, instead of 
 150 
Lenin: A Political Life 
raking up a controversy with Bogdanov that was a decade old, Lenin 
should do everyone the favour of reading what Bogdanov had written 
more recently .234 Lenin in turn refused. This was partly because he felt 
he already knew enough about Bogdanov; it was also because he, no 
less than Bukharin, hated to be deflected from what he regarded as a 
major current practicality. Bukharin's talk about the urgency of 
fashioning a totally new form of society with a comprehensively new 
culture seemed utopianism to Lenin. The cultural objectives of the 
moment, it seemed to Lenin, ought to be less ambitious: literacy, 
account-keeping and administrative capacity. Their attainment would 
massively improve the chances of putting the country on a path to 
economic reconstruction. The spectre of hunger had to be driven 
away.23S 
Bukharin would not yield. On 9 October 1920 he wrote to Lenin: 'I 
personally consider that to "conquer" bourgeois culture in its entirety, 
without destroying it, is as impossible as "conquering" the bourgeois 
state.' This statement essentially accused Lenin of attitudes to 
revolution espoused by his deadly enemy Karl Kautsky.236 Lenin, 
keeping unusually calm at such sniping, retorted algebraically: 
'(I) Proletarian culture= communism; (2) it is carried out by the 
RCP [Russian Communist Party: RS]; (3) class-proletarian [power? 
RS] = the RCP =Soviet power. Are we all agreed on this?'237 
On the cultural front, however, Bukharin would not yield. And, as 
the Politburo under Lenin's influence proceeded to bring Proletkult 
organisationally to the heel of the Soviet state, Bukharin declined to 
speak on the Politburo's behalf. 'On the Proletkults', a central party 
circular sent out on I December 1920, was written without the 
assistance of either him or any other sympathiser of the movement such 
as Anatoli Lunacharski.238 The disagreement with Lenin impelled 
Bukharin into an intense bout of reading (which was beyond Lenin's 
capacities since he could hardly cope with his governmental and party 
duties in any case). Like Lenin in the epistemological controversy of 
1908-1909, Bukharin wanted material to confound his adversary. The 
result was the book Historical Materialism, which was to appear in 
1921. On a single major point of philosophy he was at one with Lenin: 
namely that the world exists independently of human cognition and 
that any alternative suggestion was solipsistic.239 But on other points 
he differed. He did not treat Marx as unchallengeable; he continued to 
adduce not only Bogdanov but also militant anti-Marxists in support 
of his argument; he repeated that a 'proletarian' science and culture 
was needed to replace 'bourgeois' science and culture.240 A row over 
 The Tar in the Honey 
lSI 
Bolshevik cultural policy was in the making. That it did not take place 
in the winter of 1920--1921 is attributable to the onset of the most 
dangerous political crisis confronting the party since the October 
Revolution. Workers went on strike, soldiers and sailors mutinied, 
peasants revolted. The mind of Bolshevism confronted the matter of 
popular rebellion. 
